Title:The Lost Boy  
Author:Wolfe,Thomas 
Gender of Author:Male
Publication Year:1965
Publisher:Harper & Row
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2020
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: A185
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/LOST-BOY-union-between-forever-ebook/dp/B08F5C2YWG

*** START OF THIS TEXT [The Lost Boy] ***
PART I


The light came and went and came again, the thunderous chimes of three in the afternoon filled the entire city with massive bronzes, the soft April breezes ripped rainbow foils from the fountain, until the spout throbbed again the moment Grover entered the plaza.

He was a serious, dark-eyed boy with a birthmark on his neck — akin to a brown berry — and a kind expression on his face. Too calm, too attentive for his age. The worn shoes, the thick stockings tied at the knee, the shorts, straight, with three small and useless buttons on each side, the sailor's shirt, the old and battered beret, which was almost no longer shaped, supported halfway over that crow's head, the dirty and dilapidated canvas backpack hanging from his shoulder, empty at the moment but waiting for the crumpled papers of the afternoon. That scruffy and cute outfit spoke for itself. Grover turned and walked past the north face of the plaza. At that time he witnessed the union between now and forever.

The light came and went and came again, the great fountain spout throbbed and the April winds spread a soft web of moisture across the plaza. Unexpectedly, the horses of the fire department clattered on the wooden floor and abruptly shook their clean, ordinary tails.

The trams entered the plaza and stopped for a few moments, like broken toys, in their old and well-known formation in eight, every fifteen minutes. On the other side, a car pulled by a cadaverous gecko rattled on the cobblestones in front of Grover's father's store. The bell of the Tribunal building solemnly announced that it was already three o'clock. And everything remained exactly the same, as always.

Grover watched with serene eyes the agonizing interweaving of forms, the deteriorated amalgam of stone and brick, the mix of poorly matched architectures that made up the design of the plaza, but he did not feel lost. Well, "behold," he thought, "the plaza as it always has been, Dad's store, the fire department, the town hall, the fountain throbbing with its fountain, the light that comes and goes and comes again, the old man carriage that rattles past, the cadaverous jamelgo, the trams that arrive and stop a quarter of an hour, the hardware store on the corner, and next to it the library, with its tower and battlements along the roof as if it were an old castle, the row of old brick buildings on this side of the street, the people that pass by and the cars that come and go, the light that comes and changes and that always comes and goes, and everything that comes and goes and changes in the square so that it remains exactly the same ». He thought: Here is the square that never changes, that will always remain the same. Here is the month of April 1904. Here is the bell of the Tribunal and three in the afternoon. And here is Grover with his paper bag. Here is old Grover, who is about to turn twelve, here is the square that never changes, here is Grover, here is his father's store and here is the time ».

For that seemed to him the small center of his little universe, the product of the accidental masonry of twenty years, of the random agglomeration of time and truncated purposes. For him, inside him, it was the pivot of the planet, the granite nucleus of immutability, the eternal place where everything came together and happened, what would last forever and would never change.

He passed the old wooden shack on the corner — that flammable trap where S. Goldberg had his sausage stand — next to it was Singer's shop, with its gleaming display of new machines and its mesmerizing calendar: the tremendous buildings of a vibrant red; the grass was astonishingly intense green; the adorable locomotive freight train that looked like a toy as it meandered through the miniature perfection of the countryside; the huge water cistern and the green meadow everywhere. In front of the factory were playful fountains and splendid boulevards crammed with the traffic of scintillating carriages: proud two-seaters pulled by spirited, bow-necked horses, driving coachmen in top hats and enjoying charming ladies with umbrellas.

It was an adorable place and Grover was happy just looking at it. It could be New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New York. A place he had never been, but where the grass grew greener and the bricks were redder, where the freight train and the cistern, in addition to the proud horses, in that splendid symmetry, including nature, surpassed anything that he had ever seen and they gave him a pleasant feeling. It was The North, The North, the shimmering and charming North, the North of green grass, the red stable and the perfect houses. The placid and symmetrical North, where even freight trains and machines always seemed freshly painted. It was the North, where even the factory workers wore a gleaming blue jumpsuit as ornate as a soldier's uniform; where even the rivers were blue like sapphires; where you couldn't see a single unpolished edge anywhere. It was the North, the perfect, shiny, happy and symmetrical North. It was the North, his father's land, where he would one day go. He paused for a moment to look at another window. That lavish and well-photographed landscape filled him, as always, with a feeling of comfort and expectations.

He also observed the brilliant perfection of sewing machines. He watched and admired them, but felt no joy. The machines depressed him. They recalled to him the industrious murmur of housework and women sewing, the intermingling of stitch and weft, the mystery of style and pattern, the memory of women bent over the flash of a needle, the pedal loom and their persistent rune. He knew that there was a mystery to all of this that he could never unravel. He couldn't understand why women enjoyed it so much. It was a feminine work, something that provoked in him a mixture of boredom and vague sadness, in addition to a temporary cramp of horror, since his eyes always rushed in the direction of the bright needle, that needle that stitched up and down, so fast that the eye could never follow it. And then she remembered how her mother told her that once she had pierced her finger with the needle and, whenever she passed in front of that place, that would come to mind, and for an instant she would stretch her neck and look away.

Inside the store you could see Mr. Thrash, the manager. Mr. Thrash was tall and lean and wiry. He had red hair and mustache, and great horse teeth. There were strong muscles in his jaw, which Mr. Thrash put to work all the time. And when they worked, their horse teeth were exposed, in a fleeting grimace. Mr. Thrash seemed to have been stretched out on nerve-filled cables: all his movements were swift and equally nervous. Still, Grover knew it was good. Grover liked Mr. Thrash. There was something good and fast and strong and red about him.

Mister Thrash saw Grover and brought out his huge horse teeth for just a fraction of a second and greeted him with his red-knuckled hand before turning around as if he had been pulled with a cable. Grover always wondered how Mr. Thrash had ended up in that women's job. Then I would look at the splendid photograph of the Singer factory and think of it and Mr. Thrash at the same time. And then he felt good again.

He kept walking, but had to stop again at the next door, in front of the music store. Grover always felt that he must stand in front of those places where there were perfect and shiny things. He loved hardware stores and shop windows filled with precise geometric tools. He liked the windows full of hammers, saws, and jackpots. He liked the storefronts with new hoes and rakes, intact knobs of perfect white wood with the manufacturer's brand firmly stamped and sharp. He liked to see a toolbox full of new tools, ready to be released. He loved to see that kind of thing in the windows of the hardware stores and he shamelessly refocused in front of them, and he dreamed that someday he would own such a set of pieces.

He liked places that smelled good. He liked to go into the public stables to see what was going on in there. He liked the thick slatted floors of the stables, carved, kneaded, and ground by horse hooves. He liked to see the blacks with the horses, how they brushed the horses with a pillow, how they patted their gleaming rumps, growling in their horse lingo, "Sooo, go p'allá!" He liked to see how the blacks took off their harness and took them off the rods of the gigs. He liked the way the horses walked on the wooden floor, with a kind of gait that was both majestic and stiff. And he liked the casual way the horse lifted its fine tail and dropped a bowl of cereal. He liked to see all these things.

He also liked the small offices next to the public stables. He liked the seedy little offices, with their grimy windows, their small wrought-iron stoves, their slatted floors, their battered and tiny safe, their squeaky chairs with backs made from cut barrels. Its smell of horses, harnesses, sweat-cured leather. His troop of ruddy, healthy-looking men in fur pants, foul-mouthed, always on the verge of bursting into raucous laughter.

***

These were the things that Grover liked. Instead, he didn't like the look of banks, real estate offices, or fire insurers. He liked pharmacies with their clean, pungent odors, he liked pharmacy windows with huge jars of colored liquids and white balls going up and down. He did not like the windows full of medicines and hot water bottles, because somehow they depressed him.

He liked barber shops, tobacconists, but he didn't like the windows of the funeral parlor. He didn't like the secretary, or the diploma, or the potted plant, or the hanging fern. He did not like the gloomy look of the place beyond the window. He did not like the funeral home and therefore never stopped in front of it.

He did not like the appearance of the coffins either, although they seemed elegant and ostentatious. Despite this, he liked pianos, although pianos always reminded them a little of coffins. He didn't like the smell of coffins, but he did like the smell of a grand piano. It reminded him of his home, and the closed, slightly stale smell of the living room, which he liked very much. It reminded him of the living room and the living room rug, which was thick and brown and faded, and which was meticulously dusted off every morning. It reminded him of the crystal chandelier, with its tiny polished glass beads, and the way they sparkled and collided with each other when touched.

It reminded him of the artificial fruits on the tablecloth in the living room, with the glass top that covered them, it reminded him of the old dark wood shelf, with its marbled marble shelf that his father had carved with his own hands, and the huge Bible, so big and heavy that he could hardly lift it, reminded him of the voluminous album with metal covers, of his father's daguerreotypes as a child, all the brothers, sisters and other people subtly touched on the cheeks with a brushstroke of pink.

It reminded him of the stereoscope and all the images he never tired of looking at, alone on silent afternoons, looking again and again through the Gettysburg, Seminary Ridge and Devil's Den stereoscope at the sprawling shapes of these places, with their gray tones and blue.

And, finally, it reminded him of the grand piano in the living room, its imposing polished and shiny surface, its sepulchral magnificence, its kind and sweet aroma. It reminded him of how, before he got too old for such babysitters, he would enjoy snuggling under the grand piano and just sitting there on the carpet, smelling everything, thinking, feeling, extracting from it all an impression of loneliness and fervor, of isolation and proud sufficiency, a kind of dark comfort. Grover did not know why.

So he always stood in front of the music and piano stores. This was a splendid store.

And in the window was a white puppy sitting, head severely tilted to the side, a white puppy that never moved, never barked, waiting attentively in front of the glowing funnel of a speaker to hear "the voice of its master »: An always silent speaker and the shining forms of the great pianos, an air of splendor and wealth. And to one side, a counter, behind which was Mr. Markham.

Grover also liked Mr. Markham. He was a short, lively man, and everything that had to do with him was very vigorous and clean. He also had a small, lively mustache, well trimmed and greyish. His hair was equally gray, and he let it grow thick and thick. But somehow even his hair looked well trimmed and vigorous, as if each of his hair stood out on its own, clean, powerful, and firm. And Mr. Markham's face ... His features were also small and clean and lively and very delicate. He was a Yankee and had a Yankee way of speaking: neat and clean and full of clean decision. When he was attending to someone, he used to do so with his fingers arched on the counter and his head bowed gracefully, on one side, while listening to the client's requests. Then after listening to everything they had to say, He nodded quickly, vigorously, with a more bird-like gesture, and said professionally, "Uh-huh," much like dentists do when they let you spit. Then he would quickly and energetically carry out his mission, obtaining the piece of music that the client had requested.

He never seemed to doubt anything. If he had the disk, he knew it instantly, and he knew exactly where to find it: he looked for it right away, instantly, he knew the exact place where it was. And if she didn't have it, she was shaking her head just as quickly, with a kind smile slightly speckled with regret, with "I'm sorry, but we don't have that piece now." Everything Mr. Markham did was like this: clean, accurate, and vivacious. A funny little man. With Grover he was accommodating and friendly. Grover liked him. She liked to stand in front of the store and look at him, see him there, with his arched fingers, bowing his head like a bird, listening to the customer.

Next door was Garrett's store, and Grover also had to make a stop.

It was a great place, a wonderful and spacious store, that crossed the entire block, to the back street, a place full of pleasant smells. The huge keg of sweet pickles was on the left, and a little further down there was another even bigger keg for sour dill pickles. And on the counter, on the right, is always a huge, round, yellow cheese with a large V-shaped cut cleanly sectioned. Next to it was the coffee grinder, and next to the coffee grinder, the scales. And behind the counter were large baskets of coffee, cereal, and rice, large baskets that spilled in abundance. And on both sides, up to ceiling height, the shelves where you could admire an overwhelming amount of things, jams and preserves, sauces and pickles, ketchup, sardines and canned salmon, cans of tomato, and corn and peas, pork and beans. And everything one could wish for, and much more than one would have ever tasted, more than one could have even imagined or consumed. Enough, Grover thought, enough for a city. Enough, or so it seemed, to feed each and every one of the inhabitants of a city.

At the back were a huge pile of flour sacks and large strips of bacon hanging in a row, like wooden slats.

And beyond all this there were tall and narrow windows, not very clean and guarded by iron bars. The windows reminded him of the back of a real American store: the bare wall of puffed bricks like cupcakes, the forklift, everything that looks like things have always had here in America, the kind of buildings we've always had, everything that reminds in some way of the Civil War, Sherman's troops entering Atlanta, some freight cars on the tracks, a piece of station, the locomotive with its chimney, steam and soldiers passing in front of buildings like this one, made of bricks that look like biscuits, bare and sober, with a sign that says «J. Wilson Printing »or« Warehouse ».

And behind the dirty old barred windows, the forklift covered in mud. It was something that always saddened the boy a little. And it also made him a little happy. Maybe it had to do with the station and the light. Because the light came and went. When the light was right, even bricks that looked like biscuits and an empty wall could be formidable. It was difficult to explain. Much more for a child of less than twelve years. Let's just say it was America, it was the South. Familiar like the flesh and blood of a man, familiar like the winds of March, like a sore throat, like the nose when it itches, like the red mud full of straw and desolation. Or like April, April and a wild infatuation. Let's just say it was all this, bare, desolate, like a cake, adorable, lyrical and wonderful. Let's just say it was difficult to explain. America, old biscuit-looking bricks, a warehouse, and April. And the South.

And above everything and inside everything and through everything, bathing everything until it seemed that they had soaked the wood of the counter with that, until everything seemed impregnated, seasoning even the floorboards, by a single, multiple, complex , comprehensive and indefinable, but glorious, Great Smell. A smell that was not worth talking about because there were no words to do it, a smell that could not be described because there was no language for it, a smell that could never be named because there were no words for something like that. The only thing that could be said was that there was a strong and penetrating aroma of yellow cheese, the aroma of the barrel of sweet gherkins and the aroma of dill, the aroma of freshly roasted coffee and tea, the aroma of bacon and milk, the aroma of all the good and succulent things that existed,

For in these smells there was not only the recognition of past things, the perception of their separate identities. There was more, much more than that: the magic of association, of impossible desires. They were there, he didn't know how, he just knew they were there, the scents of India and Brazil, the smell of the dark South and the golden and unknown West, the smell of the great and splendid North, the smell of England and France, of the mighty rivers and the great plantations, of the foreign people and the strange languages, all the glory of the unknown world, all the splendor of the world still to visit, all the mystery, the beauty, the magnificence of the prodigious land, as if This would have been built from the splendid images taken from the haughty and feverish vision of a child.

He had to stop to look for an instant, he could not pass by. It was like walking through Arabia. In front of the store was the delivery car, the old gray horse, bent, bent over the unstable load. Occasionally the old horse would raise one of its scrawny hind legs and kick hard against the ground. Grover knew that old horse well, always looked at him with sweet nostalgia. It reminded him of summer and the sudden downpour. He had passed through the plaza on such a day. It was hot. The clouds had suddenly gathered. They were really preparing a sulphurous and electrical threat. And now all the air was ruminating on the threat of the storm. The light turned purple, the agglomeration of clouds reached the top of the lightning. And then the lightning appeared, the storm broke out.

It came all at once, in a torrential deluge like Grover had never seen. It just collapsed on top of them, as if the Mississippi had burst from the skies. It fell heavy, instantly. And in a moment the entire square was empty, without a trace of life, as if it were the ruins of an ancient city. The rain hissed as it fell, the sewers foamed, the sidewalks looked like open dams, the gutters gushing waterfalls. And Grover sought refuge in the warehouse. From there he looked out at the great flood that fell on the barren plaza. He heard the tremendous outbreak of the storm and felt happy.

***

In the plaza there was nothing left but the warehouse delivery cart and the old gray horse. The storm punished the car and spread a sheet over its roof. The rain poured down on the horse, the old horse hung its head. The rain tore and lashed his flanks. It hissed and dripped from the long gorge on its bony back. A cloud of steam billowed from his gaunt old ribs, which were to sink into the sockets of the bony hips. The old horse kept his head down patiently and the downpour kept falling. It howled and traversed the plaza from top to bottom in blinding bursts. It nailed and broke the awnings, it descended like an avalanche that threw itself against the buildings, until turning the entire plaza into a sheet of water.

And suddenly, almost as quickly as it had come, the storm stopped. The cool ink darkness dissipated, the light fell back onto the plaza, the gutters and drains gurgled and gurgled the stream. And the old horse stood there, reeking of damp, with a vague expression of weary gratitude; He raised his old head, his long gray neck, and in an instant he stiffened, kicking against the floor.

Grover was there, looking at everything. Somehow that filled him with a feeling of wonder, magic, and happiness. And he could not forget the sulphurous skies of fresh ink, fluffy and with clouds pregnant with electricity, nor the dark and premeditated lightning, so sinister, that he admired, paralyzed and in suspense, with that kind of ecstasy buried deep inside him.

And then came the glorious roar of the storm, the howling, torrential fury. And the old horse leaned against the storm like an old rock made of time. And Grover couldn't forget it. Wherever he was he saw the old gray horse or thought about it, he remembered the time, the magic light, the magic eruption of the storm on that buried summer day, the wild and primitive joy and all the smells, the darkness and the people waiting inside the warehouse.

And now he was looking at the horse again and thinking about it and looking inside the warehouse with that kind of deep and nameless outburst that the warehouse always produced for him. He was taking a deep breath and soaking his lungs in that glorious, penetrating scent. She looked at him longingly, with delight and with a mysterious wonder and also with humor and affection. He didn't know why, but the people in the store, Mr. Garrett and the clerks, always aroused in him that kind of humor and affection. Perhaps it was kindness, a kind of unctuous kindness in their tones, as if butter melted on their tongues. They were so slim, so unctuous, so persuasive when speaking ...

As Grover watched, the phone rang and Mr. Garrett went to fulfill the request. He picked up the receiver and grabbed the pencil behind his ear, all in one single deft move. He started writing down the order in a notebook.

He was a man in his forties, with his hair perfectly divided into two halves. And somehow that always made Grover amused. It seemed so appropriate ... He was wearing a long white apron and his shirt rolled up to the elbows. The wrinkles on his narrow forehead arched with shy coquetry as he spoke on the phone.

Oh, but the butter melted on Mr. Garrett's tongue, that way of speaking ... "Sure, ma'am, yes, ma'am ... Oh, sure, of course, Mrs. Jarvis ... Yes, of course." Oh, they are very good. Very good, actually ... Yes, ma'am. We only have in the morning ... Yes, ma'am. Two dozen eggs ... Two pounds of butter. Yes, ma'am, oh, it's very good. Half a dozen canned tomatoes ... Yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am. Oh, the best ... Oh, of course. We bring only the highest quality. A pound of bacon for breakfast. Yes, ma'am ... "And then, in a smooth and persuasive tone, very gently:" And coffee? ... How are we doing coffee, Mrs. Jarvis? ... We have a special offer this week, a special blend, two cents cheaper than the other, but highly recommended ... ».

And so he went on until he reviewed his entire genre, unctuously persuasive, flattering and obedient to the lady's request, delighted with life. Until, quite simply, he managed to make you drool just by hearing him talk about coffee or a pound of bacon.

Old butter lips, Grover thought, and for a moment a slight smile appeared on his serene face. "Yes, we have some great tomatoes and we have early potatoes and we have fresh onions ... And how about a few ears of corn and a little bit of sweet corn and something good and fresh? Good and fresh? "Oh yes, ma'am, as good and fresh as everything here."

Grover continued on his way.

And now, in fact, he was captivated, paralyzed, suspended. A warm, chocolate-laden draft filled her nose. He tried to pass in front of the white facade of the small store, but stopped, fighting his conscience. But he was unable to continue. It was the little sweet shop that old Crocker and his wife were running.

And Grover could not continue.

These Crockers are stingy old men! He thought scornfully. I don't intend to go in there anymore. They are so stingy that they stop the clocks at night. But ... The intoxicating heat and fragrance of hot chocolate shook him again. "I'm just going to take a look at the window to see what's there." He paused for a moment to look into the small shop with his dark, serene eyes. The immaculately clean, wallpaper-lined storefront was filled with trays of freshly made candy. His eyes fell for a moment on some chocolate balls. He unconsciously licked his lips. You put one of those on your tongue and, just like that, it melted in your mouth like honey from bees. And then there were the trays filled with delicious homemade chocolate jelly. He looked with desire at the deep body of the chocolate jelly,

"These Crockers are stingy old men!" Grover muttered again, and turned to go. "I wouldn't go back in there for the world."

But still, even so, he didn't leave. "Stingy old men." Right, but they made the best candy in town. In fact, the best he had ever tasted.

Again he looked past the window and saw Mrs. Crocker. A customer had come in and made a purchase, and as Grover looked out the window he saw Mrs. Crocker with her little sparrow hands, her little sparrow face, her scratchy lips, her upturned features, saw her lean over to examine the scale. with racanism. He held a piece of candy in his small, clean, bony fingers. It was, Grover noted, a little walnut jam with maple syrup. And while he watched, she broke it, with racanism as well, between her small bony fingers. He put a segment on the scale. The weights dropped to an alarming level and her thin lips stiffened. He removed a piece of the candy on the scale with his bony fingers and, calculating again pettyly, carefully broke it once more. This time the scale swung, slowly lowered, and rose again. Mrs. Crocker carefully put the recovered piece of candy on the tray. She put what was left in a paper bag, folded it and handed it to the customer, counted the money very carefully, and distributed it to the cash register, pennies in one place, pennies in another.

Grover stood there, looking at her with contempt. "Stingy old woman, she's afraid to give away even a crumb."

He growled contemptuously and again turned to leave. But, this time, another fact caught his attention.

As he turned around, Mr. Crocker emerged from the small compartment where they used to make all the sweets, carrying in his thin hands a tray of freshly made jelly. Old Crocker staggered along the counter and put the tray in the window. He really wobbled: he was lame. And, like his wife, he was a small, withered creature, looking like a sparrow, with thin lips and a lean, upturned face. One of his legs was a few centimeters longer than the other, and in the latter he wore a boot with a huge sole. A kind of wobbly wooden frame had been added to that boot to correct the limp. And on that wooden fork Mr. Crocker was reeling. This was the only way to describe it: the slight, upturned, slim figure of a man with bony hands and lean features,

"This Crocker is a stingy old man," Grover muttered. "He gives away nothing at all."

And still he didn't leave. He stood there, browsing, peering out the window with his dark and serene eyes, with his dark and kind face, now focused and attentive, alert and curious, pressing his nose against the glass. Unconsciously, with the worn and battered toe of her old shoe, she scratched a leg clad in the elastic sock. The fresh, comfortable scent of the freshly made sweet had reached him. It was delicious. Even captivating. Half consciously, as he continued to stare out the window with his nose pinched against the glass, he rummaged in a pants pocket and pulled out his purse, an old black leather purse with the twisted clasp. He opened it and felt inside it.

What he found did not leave him very excited: a penny, two pence and, "I had forgotten them!", Some stamps. He took out the stamps and unfolded them. There were five of two, eight of one, what he had left of the stamps worth a dollar and sixty cents that Reed, the apothecary, had given him a week or two ago in exchange for some errands.

Old Crocker, Grover thought, and cast a grim glance at the grotesque little shape that stumbled back to the back of the store, circling the corner of the counter until it was on the other side.

Well, he thought, looking at the stamps again with an indefinite gesture, the old man has kept the rest; I suppose you can also keep these ».

So, unleashing contempt to appease his conscience, Grover opened the door, entered the store, and stared for a moment at the trays behind the glass case, until he made up his mind. Pointing at the tray of freshly made chocolate jelly with a subtly derogatory finger, he said, "I want fifteen cents of this, Mr. Crocker."

He paused, fighting the feeling of shame, then raised his dark face and said quietly, "And please, I'm going to have to give you stamps again."

Mr. Crocker did not reply. He didn't look at Grover. He pursed his lips with greed. He staggered away and grabbed a popsicle, came back, opened the cabinet door, and, after staggering to the scale, began weighing the candy.

Grover watched him silently. She watched him as he calculated, squinting a bit, watched him as he grabbed the piece of jelly and divided it into two parts. And then he saw old Crocker split the jelly back into two other parts. He weighed, squinted, and hesitated until it seemed to Grover that he had done a great injustice by calling Mrs. Crocker stingy. Compared to her frugal companion, the boy thought, she was the cornucopia of abundance, a goddess of fulfillment and wealth. However, to Grover's great relief, the task had come to an end, the scales remained suspended, swaying apprehensively over the finest line of nervous balance, as if even the scales feared that one more move by old Crocker would spoil everything. .

Mr. Crocker put the jelly in a paper bag. And, moving along the counter towards the boy, he said curtly, "Where are the stamps?"

Grover handed them to him. The old man loosened the claw pressure he was exerting on the bag and placed it on the counter. Grover picked it up and put it in his canvas backpack. Then it was agreed. Mister Crocker ... Once again he felt the old shyness that was always like very strong pain. I gave him more ... There were eighteen cents on stamps. You ... you would have to give me three back.

The old man did not reply for a moment. He was busy with his small, bony hands, unfolding the stamps and ironing them on the glass counter. Once stretched, he eyed them suspiciously and somewhat impiously, bending his skeletal neck to look them up and down, like an accountant going through columns of numbers.

When he finished, he continued without looking at Grover. He said harshly, "I don't like this kind of business. If you want candy you have to bring money. This is not a stamp business. I am not the post office. I don't like these matters. The next time you come here and want something, you must pay me with money.

Red hot rage rose in Grover's throat. Choked, his olive-colored face took on the color of fury. His pitch eyes became even darker and brighter. The burning words unintentionally peeked from his lips. For a moment she was about to say, "Then why did you take the other stamps? Why do you say to me now, after keeping all the stamps, that you don't want them?

But he was a boy, an eleven-year-old boy, a calm, kind, thoughtful boy, a boy who had learned good manners, someone who had been brought up to respect the elders. So he stood there, looking silently at the old man with his pitch eyes. Old Crocker, pursing his scratchy lips a little and not looking at Grover at all, gripped the stamps with his parched fingers and, after turning around, staggered away toward the register.

He folded the two and put them on a plate, then folded one and put them next to another plate. Then she closed the register and staggered toward the other end of the counter.

Grover was still looking at him with a calm and serious face, but Mr. Crocker was not looking at him, but had started folding some stamped cardboard boxes.

Until Grover said, "Mr. Crocker, can you give me back my three stamps, please?"

The old man did not answer. He kept folding boxes, pursing his lips quickly as he did so. However, Mrs. Crocker, who had returned to her husband to help him fold boxes with her sparrow hands, said contemptuously: "Bah! I wouldn't give him anything!

Mr. Crocker raised his head and looked at Grover. "What are you waiting for?" He said.

Can I have my three stamps, please?

"I won't give you anything," replied the old man. He stopped what he was doing and hobbled over to the counter. Now get out of here! And don't go back into this store with more stamps.

"I would like to know where you get them, that's what I would like to know," said the old woman, who did not look up as she spoke these words. She tilted her head slightly to the side, toward her husband, and continued folding the boxes with her bird fingers.

"Get out of here," said Mr. Crocker, "and don't come back with any more stamps ... Where did you get them from?"

"That's just what you were asking me," said his wife. That's what I've been wondering all this time.

You've been here the last two weeks with those stamps and I don't like it. Where did you get them from?

"That's what you were asking me," Mrs. Crocker insisted.

Grover had turned pale. His eyes had lost all the shine, amazed and puzzled. "From Mr. Reed ... Mr. Reed gave them to me," he replied. And he added desperately, "Mr. Reed will tell you how I got those stamps. Ask Mr. Reed. A few days ago I ran some errands for him and he gave them to me ».

"Mr. Reed," said Mrs. Crocker lazily. She didn't even raise her head. "I find it quite strange," he added.

"Mr. Crocker," Grover asked, "let me keep my three stamps."

"Get out of here," shouted the old man, who began to stagger toward Grover. "And do not return! There is something strange in all this! I don't like it ... And I don't want to know anything ... If you can't pay like other people do, then I don't want to know anything about you. »

"Mr. Crocker," Grover said once more, and under his olive skin his face turned gray, "let me keep the other three."

"Get out of here," cried Mr. Crocker, who limped to the end of the counter. "If you don't get out of here right now ..."

"I'll call the police, that's what I'll do," said Mrs. Crocker.

Staggering, the old man circled the counter at the lowest level. He approached Grover. "Go away!" He said.

He grabbed the boy and shoved him with his small bony hands. Grover felt the revulsion deep in his stomach.

"You have to give me those three stamps," he said.

"Get out of here!" Yelled the old man, who opened the screen door and pushed the boy out of the store.

"Never come back again," he said to Grover, standing still for a moment, pressing his lips together tightly. Then he turned around and limped back inside. The door slammed behind him. Grover remained on the asphalt. And the light came and went and came again in that square.

The boy remained there for a few moments. A truck rattled past. Some passers-by came and went. The truck driver, model Garrett, came out of somewhere with a box full of groceries and put it in the van before slamming it shut. But Grover didn't notice anything, and later he couldn't remember that. He stood there, blind with rage, gray despite his olive skin, before the sundials, feeling that this was Time, that the Plaza, that the center of the universe, the granite core of immutability, and feeling also that this was Grover, that the Plaza, that the Now.

And yet something was off the agenda. Grover felt the overwhelming and corrosive guilt felt by all children, all good men on earth from the beginning of time. Even the rage had died out, drowned in the voluminous, corrosive tide of guilt.

This is the Plaza, he thought again, this is Now. There is my father's business. And everything in it remains as it always has been, except me.

And the heady square spun around him, and the light scattered in gray specks before his eyes, the fountain scattered the iridescence of the rainbow and returned to its proud, throbbing gurgle. But the day had already lost all its splendor and "here is the Plaza, here is permanence and here is time, and all this remains as it always has been, except for me."

The lost boy's worn boots shifted and stumbled blindly. Groggy feet crossed the pavement, reached the sidewalk and reached the outline of the central plaza: the grass plots and flower beds, already full of red geraniums.

I want to be alone, Grover thought, where I can't get close to him ... Oh, God, I hope he never knows, nobody ever tells him.

The fountain gurgled, the iridescent sheet of breeze blew over it. He crossed the center, reached the other side, and crossed the street. Oh God, if Dad ever finds out, Grover thought as his clumsy feet began to climb the steps of his father's business.

He found and felt the steps. The width, the thickness of the old wood, almost half a meter long. The scattered coachmen, the whips snaking over the sidewalk, the plaza, which at this point took the shape of a funnel, the rough, rough cobblestones, the side stairs leading up to the dungeon. Below, the arch of the three o'clock market, the embankment of the coachmen and the cars that came from the countryside, the ups and downs, the cracked mud of the Negro neighborhood, the barracks and the houses, and beyond the top of the hill, immensely close, beginning to green on the eve of April.

He saw it all. The iron beams on his father's porch, a little worn, with that greenish-black tone, so innocuous and rare, that kind of beams acquires in this land and this climate. Two angels dotted with flies and the stones where people sat waiting. And next door: the fly-studded jewelry window, the window sill, the screwed monocle and, inside, the small wooden fence around the jewel box, its wide eyebrows, its yellowish and wrinkled features and a safe, lots of dust and lots of yellowed newspapers.

And throughout the stonecutter's shop, cold forms of white marble, a rounded stone, a pedestal, the languid angel with his loving hands in hard marble.

The workshop was at the back of the store. Grover walked down the hall, white shapes surrounding him. He knew the place well: the little wrought-iron stove in the left corner, brown, heavily worn, lumpy from the heat, and the corner of the chimney that ran through the store before going outside, the tall, dirty windows They overlooked the market square, towards the Negro neighborhood, the old and rustic shelves made of simple thick boards, the unpolished wood, full of splinters reminiscent of the shaggy hair of an animal; on the shelves, chisels of all sizes and a layer of pulverized stone; an emery wheel with a pneumatic pedal and a door that opened onto the alley, although the sidewalk was three meters below; a brass potty embedded in the ground, rusty and stinky, and, concealing it, a wooden frame or screen with a torn cotton cloth. There were, furthermore, two easels, made of that ordinary and knotty wood, on which two tombstones rested. A man worked in one of them.

The boy looked at the tombstone and saw that the last name was Creelman: he analyzed John's carving, the symmetry of the S, the subtle impression of Creelman. November. 1903. With so much cruelty, so much dry stubble, so many pine trees, so much mud around him, on top of him.

The man looked up. He was fifty-three years old, his mustache bushy. He looked tired. He was immensely tall and stout. It must have been two meters, or even more. He wore good quality clothing, dark and quality clothing, heavy, solid, no coat. He worked in shirt sleeves, with the vest pierced by a thick watch chain, the pointed collar, and the black tie. A protruding Adam's apple, bony forehead and nose, bright gray-green eyes, cold, shallow, and showing a certain lonely air. A striped apron tied around the neck and starched sleeves. And in his hand the wooden mallet, not a hammer, but an impressive round wooden mallet that looked like a butcher stone; and in the other hand, a cold, hard chisel.

"How are you son?"

I do not look. He asked calmly, concentrating on what he was doing. He worked with the chisel and the wooden mallet as a jeweler would with a watch, only that there was also great power in the man and in the wooden mallet.

"What's the matter, son?" He said.

He turned the table around to start again with the letter J.

"Dad, I haven't stolen those stamps," said Grover.

The man put the gavel aside, put the chisel aside. He circled the easel.

"What did he say.

And Grover blinked several times and his pitch eyes began to glow, tears welled up, hot. "I haven't stolen those stamps," he said.

"But what is it?" Said his father, "what stamps are you talking about?"

"The ones Mr. Reed gave me when the other boy got sick and I worked three days for him ...

And old Crocker grabbed all the stamps and kept the rest. I told him that Mr. Reed had given them to me ... And now he owes me three stamps, but he says he doesn't think they were mine, he says I must have taken them from somewhere. "

"The stamps Reed gave you," said the stonecutter. "The stamps you had ..." He moistened his thumb on his lips, left his store, and when he reached the door of the jewelry store cleared his throat and shouted: "Jannadeau ...!".

But Jannadeau, the jeweler, was not there at the time.

The man returned to his workshop, cleared his throat again, and as he passed by the old gray screen in his office, he moistened his thumb and said as if to himself: "I'll tell you ...".

Then he went out again, walking back to the jewelry store, muttering, "I'll tell you ..." Then he returned to the workshop, passed among the tombstones arranged in columns and said, almost in a whisper: "By God, now ...".

Then he took Grover by the hand and they hurried out. The corridor, the tombstones, the marble porch, the angels dotted with flies, the wooden steps, the carriages and the cobbled embankment, the stairs of the dungeon, the town hall, the market, the four not so symmetrical corners of the square, buildings. They went through all these sites but did not notice anything.

And the fountain throbbed, the stream gushed out in iridescent sheets. An old gray horse, with lacerated lips and a kind of peaceful expression, was sucking on the frozen mountain water, which flowed down the tube as Grover and his father crossed the plaza.

The man took the hand, the hand of his little son, the boy's hand was trapped, captive in the hand of the stonecutter, and together they walked the hallway, the cold marbles, the porch where there were two angels and they went down the stairs and passed next to the coachmen sitting on the steps.

They passed through the plaza, through the iridescence in the breeze, to the other side, to the candy store.

The man was still wearing his long apron, he hadn't stopped to change his long striped apron, he was squeezing Grover's hand. Opened the door and got in. "Give him the stamps," he said.

Mr. Crocker staggered away behind the counter, with that suspicious look that suddenly wanted to turn into a smile: "It's just that ..." she said.

"Give him the stamps," said the man, and tossed a few coins on the counter.

Mr. Crocker limped over to the stamps. He staggered back. "I just didn't know ..." he continued.

The stonecutter grabbed the stamps and gave them to the boy. And Mr. Crocker grabbed the coins.

"I just didn't know that ..." said Mr. Crocker, smiling.

The man with the apron cleared his throat: "You don't know what it is to be a father", he said, "you have never known what a father feels or you have never understood what a son feels ... So you act like this .. But justice will be done sooner or later. God has cursed you, made you a miserable man, given you that limp and prevented you from having children ... And so, lame and childless, miserable as he is, he will go to his grave and no one will remember him.

Mrs. Crocker, rubbing her bony little hands, said pleadingly, "Oh no, please don't say that, don't say that."

The stonecutter, still breathing heavily, left the store.

The light went out and came again.

"Good," he said, and put his hand on the boy's back.

"Good," he said, "there is no need to worry."

They walked across the plaza, the breeze sprayed them, the horse neighed at the fountain. "Good," said the stonecutter.

And the old horse hung its head and lashed the cobblestones with its hooves.

"Good," said the stonecutter once more, "and now behave yourself well." He retraced his own long steps, toward the store, the workshop.

The lost boy stayed in the plaza near the porch of his father's store.

This is Time, thought Grover, this is Grover, this is Time ...

A truck turned to enter the plaza. The advertisement on the back of the truck read "Saint Louis" and "Excursion" and "Universal Exposition."

And the light went out and came back to the plaza, and Grover stood there quietly thinking, "Here is the plaza and here is Grover, here is my father's store and here I am."





PART II




... I remembered Grover and that morning when we were crossing Indiana to go to the Universal Exposition ...

As we traversed Indiana — you were too young, too young, you can't remember — all the apple trees were sprouting, it was April. All the trees were sprouting. It was the beginning of spring in Indiana and everything turned green. We certainly don't have farms like they do in Indiana. In the mountains we cannot have farms like those. Grover, of course, had never seen farms like these before, so I suppose he must be becoming aware of it.

He sat there with his nose against the window, looking at the scenery. I will never forget it like this: sitting, glued to the window, motionless. He looked so serious ... He had never seen farms like these and tried to assimilate. All morning we traveled along the Wabash River. The Wabash River runs through Indiana, it's the river that song was written about. So we spent the whole morning traveling along the river. And I just sat there with all of you around me as we drove through Indiana toward Saint Louis to visit the World's Fair.

You guys kept running down the train aisle. Well, no, what am I saying, you were very small; You were just three years old, so I took you with me the whole time. But the rest of the kids kept running down the hall, from top to bottom, from one window to another. They kept crossing from one side to the other. Every time they discovered something new they called out loud. They were trying to look everywhere at the same time, as if they could have eyes at the nape of the neck. You see, son, it was the first time they were in Indiana, and I suppose that in the eyes of a child everything must seem strange and new.

And it also seemed that nothing was enough for them. It seemed like they couldn't sit still. They kept running up and down and side to side, screaming and yelling, until: "I swear, kids! I've never seen anything like it! ”I said. "That way of running non-stop from one side to the other, from top to bottom, without staying still for a minute, surpasses anything I've seen!" I said. "I don't understand how you can do it!" I said.

You see, I guess they were excited to go to Saint Louis, and they were so curious about everything they were seeing ... They were so young and everything seemed so strange and new ... They couldn't help it and wanted to see everything. But "I swear," I said, "if you don't sit down and stay still, you're going to be grounded before you even see Saint Louis and the Exposition!"

Everyone except Grover. He does not; no, sir, not him. Now, boy, I want to tell you. I have raised many of you. I have seen you grow and leave, and you were all quite clever, if you will allow me; there was not a single hollow head among you. And you say so! I always knew you were very smart. Sometimes they come here to brag about how smart you are, and I realize how you have made your way in the world and, as the saying goes, you have your reputation. I can't stand them, you know. I just sit here and let them talk. I don't brag about you. If they want to show you off, it's their problem. I have never boasted of any of my children in my entire life. When our father educated us, we learned that you have no offspring to boast of. "If others want to do it," said Dad, "over there; never imply, with a word or a gesture, that you understand what they are talking about. Let them speak and say nothing.

So when they come here to tell me all the things that you have done, I do not give them a foot, I never say a single word. And you say so! Because, well, you know ... Oh, about a month ago or so a guy came, a well-dressed man, you know, he seemed smart, one of those with poise. He said he came from New Jersey, or somewhere in that part of the country, and he started asking me all kinds of questions, what were you like when you were a kid and things like that.

I just pretended that I was studying the matter in depth and then I said, "Well, yes," very serious, you know. "Well yes ... I guess I should know something about him ... He was my son, like everyone else ..." I said with all the solemnity of the case, you know. "He was not a bad boy," I said, "when he was twelve he was practically the same as the rest of the boys ... a good boy, normal like any other."

"Oh," he said, "but didn't you notice something?" Wasn't there something strange about him? ”He said. "Something different that I hadn't seen in other boys?" I didn't stand up, you know. I kept everything to myself and looked at him, solemn like an owl. I simply pretended that I was studying the matter in depth, it would be serious enough.

"Well no," I said slowly, as if I had studied the matter thoroughly, "he had a good pair of eyes and a nose and a mouth, two arms and legs, and a good head full of hair and the normal number of fingers in hand. and feet, like the rest of the boys ... I suppose that if he had been different from the others in any of these aspects he would have noticed it immediately ... But if I remember correctly he was a normal, ordinary boy, like all others". "Sure," he said, all excited, you know, "sure, but wasn't he brilliant? Didn't you ever realize how brilliant it was? It must have been much brighter than the others! "Well," I said, pretending to study the matter thoroughly. "Let me see ... Ah yes," I said, and I looked him in the eye with all the solemnity that seemed to demand that situation. "He was doing very well in his studies ... Always approved. I never heard it said that the teacher had put the hood of fools on him. But of course ..., "I said," that didn't happen to any of my other boys, either. Not that I want to brag about them. It does not seem right to me to boast of children ... If others want to do it, that is their business. We are ordinary people, we have never claimed anything else ... But I am going to tell you one thing: everyone had their fair share of intelligence and judgment. None of them would be a genius, but they all had their heads in their places, and no one ever suggested that I take any of them to one of those homes for those with mental weaknesses ... », I said, and I looked him in the eye, you know. "It won't be long, but it's more than I can say about some people I know," I said. Well yes, I guess he was a smart boy. I never had to reproach him for anything in that regard. He was smart enough, "I said. "The only problem, and I blurted it out to him hundreds of times, so I'm not saying anything that he hadn't heard before, the only problem," I said, "is that he was lazy."

"Lazy!" He said.

Oh, you should have seen his face, you know. He jumped, as if a thumbtack had been nailed to him. "Lazy!" He exclaimed again. "Doesn't that mean ...?"

Yes, I said. Oh, at no time did a smile escape me. "The last time I saw him I let him go ... I told him it was an incredible luck for him that he had the gift of the lip ... Of course, the boy went to college and read a lot of books, and I I imagine it was there that he acquired that torrent of language that they say he has ... But, as I released him the last time I saw him: If you can make a living doing that very light job of teaching, you are very lucky, because none of yours has had such luck. They all had to work very, very hard to earn a living. ”

Oh, I said so, you know. I told him bluntly. I did not gild the pill. And I will tell you one thing: you should have seen his face. It was a poem.

"Well," he said at last, "then you will have to admit it. He was the brightest of all his children, wasn't he?

I stared at him for a moment. I had to tell him the truth. He could no longer deceive him. "No," I said, "he was a brilliant boy, very good. I have no complaints about it in that regard. But the brightest boy I ever had, the one who outperformed everyone else in good sense, understanding and judgment, the best boy I have ever had, the smartest I have ever seen, was one you don't know, one you never know. he saw. It was the boy I lost.

He looked at me for a moment and said, "And who was that boy?"

And I tried to tell him. But when I tried to pronounce the word Saint Louis, I couldn't. Son, my son, the name of that damn place came back to me and everything was as it had always been. I couldn't pronounce the word. She couldn't bear to be mentioned by anyone. For thirty years or more, wherever someone told me that name, or when I heard it anywhere, I would think about it again. And it was as if an old wound reopened again. I couldn't help it. It will always be so. Son, my son. And when I thought about it again, and when I tried to tell that man, everything went back to the way it was. I couldn't say it. I had to look away. And I admit that I cried.

Because wherever I heard that old name, I always, always saw him sitting there again, so serious, with his nose pressed against the window as we drove through Indiana that morning on the way to the Exposition. Apple trees were sprouting, also peach trees. All the trees. And everything, everything was waiting for April as we traveled along the river, on our way to the Exhibition.

And Grover was sitting there, so calm and serious. The other boys were very excited, running up and down, screaming at each other, from one side of the car to the other. However, Grover was sitting there, looking out the window without moving. Sitting there like a man. He was only eleven and a half years old. Son, my son. He was a smart boy. As the newspaper said when he died, my boy had the judgment of someone twice as old. He had more sense, more judgment, more understanding than any child I have ever met.



So there was Grover, you know, that morning, looking out the window toward the river and the farms. Because I imagine I have never seen farms like these. And I still remember how he was looking at everything by the window, with his black hair, his eyes the color of tar and the birthmark on his neck. You and your brother were the only brown skin I had. The others came out very white and with gray hair like the father. But you and your brother looked like the ones from Pentland, the darker skin, the dark complexion of Alexander ... and the appearance of those from Pentland. You are the living image of your Uncle Lee, but Grover was the darker of the two.

And then she sat down next to that gentleman and began to look out the window. And then he turned to ask the knight all kinds of questions: what trees were those, what grew there, how big were the farms. All kinds of questions that the gentleman was answering, until I said: «Enough, Grover! You shouldn't ask so many questions. Stop bothering". I was worried, you know, that the boy was pestering him with so many questions.

The knight threw back his head and laughed out loud. I didn't know who he was, I never knew his name, but he was a handsome man and had grown very sympathetic to Grover. So she threw her head back and laughed and said, "Don't worry about the boy, nothing's wrong ... I don't mind a bit, and if I can answer your questions I will. And if I can't, I'll let you know. And he put his arm on Grover's shoulders. Don't worry about the boy. I don't mind a bit.

And I can still remember what she looked like, with her black eyes, her black hair and the birthmark on her neck. So serious, so serious, so thoughtful, as if he were looking out the window at all those apple trees, the farms, the stables, the houses and the orchards, assimilating everything because it seemed to him, I imagine, so strange and new.

Son, my son, it was so long ago, but when I hear that name again everything returns as if it had happened yesterday. And the old wound opens. I can see it as it was, as it shone that morning when we traveled through Indiana, by the river, on our way to the Universal Exposition.





PART III




... Do you remember how it was? ... I mean the birthmark, the black eyes, the olive skin ... Well, I suppose you were very young ... The other day I was looking at that photograph ... You know which one I mean? The one where we all went out, in front of the house on Woodson Street ... You don't go out in that photo ... No ... you hadn't arrived yet ... Do you remember how mad you were when we told you not to? Were you more than a simple cloth dropped from Heaven? ... Ahhhh ...

... You were the baby ... That's what you get when you are the baby ... You don't appear in the photo, do you? ... Ahhhh ... I was looking at that old photo the other day ... There we were ... And, my God, what is all this about? ... Have you never felt like this? And you know what I mean. Have you never felt, I don't know, weird? Don't you ever think about these things? ... I mean, doesn't your head get to brrrr-rr sometimes, you know what I mean, when you try to understand things ...? Doesn't it happen to you? ... Now I would like to know ... You have been to the university and you must know the answer ... Have you ever thought about this? ... Because I would like to know. Do you know what I mean? ... I would like you to tell me if you know ...

... ahhhh.

... I know, but ... Oh, God, when I think about how things used to be ... Have you ever stopped to think about that? ... I want to ask you ... What were you like, what did you look like ... Now I'd like to know ... Sometimes I think about all those dreams I used to have ... Playing the piano, practicing seven hours a day, believing that someday I would be a great pianist ... Taking singing lessons with the Aunt Nell because she thought that someday she would have a great career in the opera ... Ahhhh.

... I don't know if you can get an idea ... Can you imagine it? ... Ahhhh ... Me! At the opera! ... Ahhhh ... Now I want to ask you ... I would like to know ...

... Can you understand it? ... Do you know the answer? ... Because if you do, I would like you to tell me ...

OMG! When I go to town and walk down the street and I see all those boys and girls with that funny look milling around the cafeteria ... it makes me think ... I mean, those funny little faces ... And that funny way they have to talk ... Do you think we were like this? ... I mean, with all those funny little things and in such bad taste ... Can you imagine us like that? ... With that cute way of speaking, You know ... Have I chosen the correct word? ... Do you understand? Cute things ... It makes you think ... Do you think they think of anything other than milling around the cafeteria and saying cute things? ... I would like to know ... Do you think any of them have ambitions as we had them us? ... Do you think any of those funny girls are thinking of making a great career in the opera? ... You never saw that photo, of course.

... They did it in front of the old house on Woodson Street. Dad comes out with his morning coat, next to mom ...

And Grover and Ben and Steve and Daisy and me, all of us with our feet on our bikes ... Poor Luke only had four or five. He still didn't have a bike like we did. Ahhhh ... But there it was. And there we were all together and ...

Well, there I was, with my poor skinny legs and my long white dress and two braids falling down my back. And all those funny clothes we used to wear, with those lace, and Ollie Wolfe was there, next to Mom and Dad, in her uniform from the war against Spain in Cuba ... It was just around that time. Don't you remember Ollie in uniform? ... No, of course you can't. You were not born.

... But, well, we were a group of good-looking people, if you will allow me. This is how it was in 1886, with the front porch and the vines and flowers in front of the house ... And Mrs. Eliza standing next to Dad with a fob watch on her chest ... Ahhhh. ..

Do you remember Mom's fob watch? ... And do you remember Mrs. Amy Partridge and the ladies of the Maccabees family? ...

Ahhhh ... I want to laugh, but Mrs. Eliza ... Well, mom ... Mom was a pretty woman at that time ... Do you know what I mean? Mrs. Eliza was a very good-looking woman and Dad was there with her in her morning coat. Do you remember how Dad used to dress on Sundays? ... And how imposing did he seem then? ... And how did he let me take his money in my hands and count it? ... And how rich did we all think he was? ... And how wonderful did that little shop in the square where they sold marbles seem to us? ... Ahhhh ... Can you imagine it? ... Because we believed that Dad was the most important man in the city and ... Oh , no, you can't tell me! You can not! He had his flaws, but Dad was an extraordinary man. Wow it was!

... And there were Ben and Grover, Daisy, Luke and me.

... Everyone posing in front of the house with one foot on the pedal of the bikes ... And that's how I thought about all this again. Everything returns.

... He was a sweet boy. Don't you remember it at all? You do not remeber anything? How he looked there in Saint Louis ... You were barely three or four years old, but you must remember something ... Do you remember how you used to bellow when I bathed you?

... Ahhhh ... Poor thing, you would call Grover every time I put you in the tub ... Ahhhh ...

At mom's house I was a little slave ... so I used to mop the floors ... I guess when I put you in the tub I must treat you like one of mom's rooms ... Ahhhh ...

Have you already forgotten?

You do not remember?

I hadn't thought about that in a long time, until the other day, when I saw that photograph again ... It was as if everything happened again ... Grover was working at the Incide Inn, on the grounds of the Exposition ...

... Do you remember the old Incide inn? ... That huge wooden thing inside the Exhibition ... And do you remember that I used to take you there to wait for Grover to finish working? ...

And the fat old Billy Pelham at the newsstand ... He always gave you a gum stick ... Ahhhh ... Do you remember Billy Pelham and his chewing gum? ...

Everyone was crazy about Grover ... Everyone liked him ... He was a very sweet boy ... And he was very proud of you ... Do you remember how he used to brag about his brother? ... How he used to get you out walk around and make you talk to Billy Pelham? Do you remember? ... And with Mr. Curtis, in the office? ... And with that boy from the little bell whom everyone called Prince Albert? ... The poor and lanky Albert Fox ... Ahhhh. .. Do you remember Albert Fox? ... Do you remember how Grover tried to make you talk? I wanted you to say "Grover" ... And you couldn't ... You couldn't pronounce the "r" ... And then you said "Guove" ... Did you forget all that? ... You shouldn't forget because ...

So you were a very cute boy ... Ahhhh ... You know what I mean? ... I don't know where your charm ended up, but then you were causing a sensation ... A-hh-hh ... You should not forget it . Because, I'll tell you, boy, back then you were still Someone ...

... I was thinking about it the other day, while looking at that photograph ... How we were going to meet him and how he took us to Midway ... Do you remember Midway? ... The Snake-eating Man and the Living Skeleton, The Fat Woman and the Slide, the Panoramic Train and the Ferris Wheel ... How you bellowed that night, when we got you on the Ferris wheel ... You bellowed like crazy ... I tried to laugh to have a bad time, but, I confess it to you I was scared too ... Back then, the Ferris wheel was serious ... How Grover laughed at us, trying to explain to us that there was no danger ... OMG! Poor little Grover. He was only twelve years old and what an adult seemed to all of us ... I was two years older, but I still thought that he knew everything ...

Poor. He always brought us something. Ice cream, sweets, something he would have bought with the little money he had earned at the Exhibition ...

... One afternoon we went downtown ... I think we had run away from home ... Mom would be out somewhere ... And Grover and I took the tram and got to the center ... And, my God, we thought we were traveling somewhere ... In those days we called that a trip ... A tram ride back then was a sensational thing ... I heard that the whole area is now full of new construction ...

So we got on the streetcar on King Avenue and we made the whole ride to the Saint Louis business district ... We got off Washington Street and walked up and down ... And, boy, boy, I assure you, that seemed to us the greatest. Grover took me to a cafeteria and invited me to mineral water. Then we went out and walked a little more towards Union Station and beyond, to the river.

... And deep down we both had a scare to death for what we had done, and we wondered what Mom would think if she were to discover us.

... We stayed there until it started to get dark and we passed a food house ... A shabby place with shabby chairs and people sitting in armchairs, eating at the bar ...

We read all the signs to see what they gave to eat and how much it cost, and I suppose that nothing on the menu should have been worth more than fifteen cents, but it would not have seemed more succulent to us if it had been food from Dolménicos ... So we we were there, with our noses pressed against the window ... Two starving boys, with a scare to death, with the excitement of having escaped a lifetime of ... You know what I mean? ... And smelling everything amazed and thinking how good it smelled ... Then Grover looked at me and said: "Come on, Helen ... let's go inside ... it says that the pork with beans is worth fifteen cents ... I have money ... I have sixty cents" .

... I was so scared that I couldn't speak ... I had never been in a place like this ... but I kept thinking: "Oh, God, if Mom found out" ... I felt like we were committing a big crime ... you know what i mean? Do you know what it feels like when you are a child? It was the excitement of a lifetime of ... I couldn't contain myself. So we went in and sat in those high chairs in front of the bar and ordered pork with beans and a cup of coffee ... I guess we were too terrified of what we had done to enjoy it. We just gobbled all that down in a jiffy and drank our coffee in one gulp. And I don't know if it was because of the excitement ... I guess the poor boy was already sick and didn't know it yet. Anyway, I turned around to look at him and he was pale as a dead man ... And when I asked him what was wrong, he didn't say anything ... He was too proud. He said he was fine, but I realized that he was sick like a dog ...

So he paid the bill ... It was forty cents. I'll never forget that as long as I live ... We barely had time to get out the door. He reached the sidewalk and then threw up everything ...

The poor boy was so scared and so ashamed ... What scared him the most was not being sick, but the fact that he had spent all the money. And in vain. And if Mom found out ... Poor boy, he just stood there looking at me and whispered, "Oh Helen, don't tell Mom. He'll be mad at me if he finds out. Then we went home in a hurry.

By the time we got there, he was already burning with fever. Mom was waiting for us ... She looked at us, you know how Mrs. Eliza looked at you when she thought you had done something you shouldn't have ... Mom said: "Can you tell where you were?" I suppose he was preparing to give us a good lesson. Then he saw the face Grover was wearing. And that was enough ... He said, "But, son, what have you got?" He turned white as paper ... And the only thing Grover answered was: "Mom, I'm sick ...".

And he collapsed on the bed.

We take off her clothes. Mom put her hand on his forehead and went out into the living room. She was so white that you could have drawn a black line on her face using chalk. She whispered to me, "Go get the doctor, quick, she's on fire."

I ran down the street, my braids in the air, to Dr. Parker's house. I went back with him.

When he left Grover's room, I heard him say to Mom, "Typhus" ...

I think she already knew it ... she knew it ... He had already been sick once. She didn't give up until the end ... She never gave any sign that she would give up ...

But I think you already knew that. I knew it.

... I looked at her. Her face was as white as paper. She looked at me and it was as if I wasn't there ... She was never able to see me. I heard her say, "There it is ... there it is" ... It's that simple. And, my God, I will never forget the look on her face, her way of saying it, how my heart stopped beating and rose to my throat ... Poor mom ... I was just a slave in that old house. She was just a skinny fourteen-year-old girl. But I knew Mom was dying of pain in front of me ... I knew that even if Mom lived to be a hundred years old, she could never get over that, she would never be able to forget it. I knew I'd die every time I thought about it

... poor mom. You know. She never got over it. Grover was his favorite. She cared about him more than any of the others ... Poor Grover! ... So sweet. I can still see him in bed, pale as a sheet, for all those weeks that followed, until he was reduced to a bag of skin and bones.

... I remembered it all the other day, when I looked at that photograph and thought: "My God, we were two children and I was only two years older than him ... And now I'm forty-six and Grover would have to to be forty-four ... ». You imagine? Unbelievable ... OMG, he seemed so adult to me. He was an extremely calm boy ... You know what I mean? ... He was just a boy, but he seemed older than all of us.

... And when I think of those two kids, so funny, with their noses crushed against the glass of that old and filthy food house ... and how natural everything seemed, how exciting and wonderful ... and how scared we were that mom found out ... and how we ran home ... and how pale he was ...

And how long has it been since then ...

And now I find a photo and everything comes back to my mind. The inn, Saint Louis, the Universal Exhibition ... And everything as it has always been, as if it had happened yesterday ...

And we have all grown up and I am forty-six years old ...

And nothing has turned out as we expected ...

All my hopes, my dreams and my great ambitions have come to nothing ...

Then, then, that's when it all comes back to my mind, two scared boys, alone, in Saint Louis, with their noses stuck to the window of a filthy food house ... And Grover with his birthmark on his neck. .. Don't you remember what it was like? Nothing? What was everything like? From the house where we lived? ... From the night he died ... I went and lifted you up so you could see him ... That old house we lived in, on the corner ... The pantry, the smell of the pantry ... A house for renting rooms, Saint Louis and the Exhibition ...

It's been so long, it's like it happened in another world. And then it all comes back to my mind, like it happened yesterday ...

And sometimes I stay awake at night and think of all the people who passed by those days and the things that happened. And I think that nothing has turned out as we thought it would. And I listen to the trains that pass by the river and the whistles and the bell ... And I think about the trip we made to Saint Louis in 1904 ...

And then I go out into the street and I see the faces of the people who pass by ... Don't they seem strange to you? Don't you notice something strange in her eyes, as if everyone was perplexed by something? ... Or am I just crazy?

Do you know what I mean? ... You have gone to university and I want to know ... I want you to tell me if you know the answer ... I mean that look they have, that strange look in their eyes .. Do you know what I mean? ... Have you noticed what they look like? ... Did you ever notice that when you were a child? ...

OMG I wish I had the answers to all these questions ... I would like to know what went wrong ... what has changed since then ...

And if we also seem strange to others ...

And if we have also changed ...

And if we also have that strange look in our eyes ...

And if it happens to all of us, to each and every one of ...



The way things turn out has nothing to do with what you expect them to be ... And it's amazing how everything is lost until things seem to have never happened ... as if we had dreamed them ... Do you understand what I mean?

That's something that - we've heard it somewhere - has happened to more people ...

And then it all comes back to my mind ...

And there you have two skinny and scared kids with their nose pressed against a dirty glass, thirty years ago ... The touch, the smell, even that strange smell that came from the old pantry of our house.

And the steps in front of the house, the appearance of the rooms. Those two boys in sailor suits who used to ride their trikes back and forth ...

And the birthmark on his neck ... the Inn Incide ... Saint Louis and the Exhibition.

... Everything comes back as if it happened yesterday.

And then it goes away and it seems distant and strange as if it had happened in a dream ...





PART IV




"This is King Avenue," said one man.

Then I saw that it was simply a street. There were a few new buildings, a big hotel, a couple of modern-looking restaurants and bars, the monotonous and livid neon lights, the incessant car traffic. It was all new, but it was just a street. And I knew that it had always been a simple street and nothing else, but, I don't know why, I stood there motionless, wondering if I expected to find something else.

The man looked at me questioningly for a moment and I asked him if the Universal Exposition had not been there

"Sure, it was here, a little further," said the man. Now there is a park. But wasn't this the street you were looking for? Don't you remember the name of the street or some other information? », He said.

I told him that I thought the street name was Egmont, but I wasn't sure.

I told him it sounded like something to me.

And I told him that the house was in a corner between this and that street.

Then the man asked me: "And what do you say the street was called?"

I told him that I didn't know, but that the house was on a corner, and that King Avenue was one or two blocks away, and that a streetcar passed half a block or so from where we lived.

"And what tram was it?" Asked the man as he looked at me.

"Long distance one," I said.

Then the man looked at me first, then at the other man who was with him, and finally said, "I don't know of any long distance tram."

I told him it was a line that ran behind the houses and that there were wooden fences and grass by the tracks.

I told him that I believed that the line crossed the neighborhood behind the houses, but, I don't know why, I was unable to explain to him that back then it was summer and you could smell that smell: wood and tar, and that a kind of absence stayed in the afternoon after the tram passed. I just told him the trunk line was back there, between the backyards of some wood-fenced houses, I just told him King Avenue was one or two blocks away.

I did not tell him that King Avenue at the time was not a street, but a kind of magically open road between dark and haunted grounds, and that for me it was mixed with the song of 'Tom, Tom, the Piper's They are, ”with Lenten rolls, with all the light that came and went and with the shadows of the clouds that passed over the mountains, with the trip to Indiana that morning and the smell of engine smoke, with Union Station and, above all, with the distant and lost voices that said so long ago: «King Avenue».

I didn't tell him these things about King Avenue because I looked around and saw what King Avenue had become. King Avenue was a street, a wide, bustling street, with new hotels and bright lights and endless herds of cars coming and going. All I could tell him was that the street was near King Avenue and that the house was on a corner and that an intercity streetcar line passed nearby. I said it was a stone house and that it had stone steps on the facade and a small rectangle of grass. I told him that I thought the house had a turret in one corner, but I wasn't sure.

The two men turned to look at me and one of them said, "This is King Avenue, but we have never heard of such a street."

I walked away and kept walking until I found the site. And again, again, I went back into that street and found the place where the two corners met, the compact block, the turret and the steps. I paused for a moment, looking back, as if the street was Time.

For a moment I waited for a word to come up, for a door to open, for a child to come. I waited, but there were no words and no one appeared.

Still, it had always been that way, only now the steps seemed lower and the porch less high, and the rectangle of grass smaller than I remembered ... But everything else was just as I knew it would be. A gray stone façade, all three floors with a sloping slate roof, the brick side with windows, still with the old entrance arch in the center, for use by doctor's patients.

There was a tree, a lantern, and behind and to the side, more trees than he imagined he would find.

And the slate roof of the turret, the slate tops on the windows, which ended in a point. And the arch of the two windows of the living room made of hard stone. And the small carved stone porch, with the sloping slate roof.

And everything seemed so strong, so solid, so ugly.

And everything except the steps and grass seemed so durable, so well done ...

In fact, it was just as I remembered it, as I knew I would find it, without deceiving myself, without lying to myself ... Although, deep down, it had always been like that, only I couldn't smell the pitch, the hot dryness and sticky from the tram sleepers, the fence boards of the yards and the sparse, bald grass.

Neither could he feel the absence in the afternoon when the tram had passed, nor the twins, with their sharp faces and sailor suits, pedaling furiously loudly on their tricycles, up and down, in front of the house, nor the black servant. , Simpson, returning from somewhere with his basket, nor the feeling of the afternoon, lonely because everyone had gone to the Exhibition.

Except for this, everything was exactly the same, except for this and for King Avenue, which had become a street, except for this, King Avenue and the boy who did not appear.

It was a hot day. It had begun to grow dark, the heat rising and remaining there, suffocating like a soggy sheet hanging over Saint Louis. It was a humid heat, a heat that one knew impossible to attenuate or refresh, a heat that one knew immobile. And when trying to think of the moment when the heat would go away one would say to oneself: «It cannot last that long. By force it will have to happen », as they say in America. But deep down he said it without conviction. The heat soaked everything and people were choking on it, people's faces seemed pale and greasy from the heat. And in those faces there was a kind of patient misery, and you felt that kind of desolation that you feel at the end of a hot day in any big city in America. When we are far from home, on the other side of the continent,

You felt like when you are away and alone in a big city and you hear the sound of trains, bells, whistles, and boats on the river, like when you walk down the street under a bunch of hot electric lights or like when you try to get to the park: the dry grass, the remains of muddy newspapers and the people scattered by the yellowish grass ... Or like when you see the kind of benches they put in the parks here, in America, to make us feel happy at the end on a hot day, that particular bench, with the hardened glow of the electric light and dead right on top, for people to behave properly.

Anyone knows that this is endless, that he is drowned, that he cannot escape. He knows that he is lost and shipwrecked in America, a country too big to be a country. On those occasions you also know that you are homeless. He knows that he cannot get hold of one or keep it. On those occasions a man knows that the madness of youth and night are no longer useful, and that even loneliness does not help ... And that man now knows that he himself is hardly an atom without a name, an atom lost in the empty, a ridiculous and dusty figure that revolves around an uncountable time, and that all the dreams, the strength, the passion and the faith in youth have ended up withering away.

And that man only feels the absence, the absence and all the desolation of America, the loneliness and sadness of the high and hot skies. And the afternoon, which falls throughout the Midwest, on the suffocating land, on all the lonely little towns, on the farms, on the fields, which covers, with its burning torpor, Ohio, Kansas, Iowa, Indiana. And the voices are scarcely heard, like murmurs, in that enormous emptiness, because of the fatigue produced by the heat, hardly heard in the immense space, in the afflicted and high and terrible skies.

Then he listens to the engine and wheels again, the wail of the whistle and the bell, the sound of the change of needles in the suffocating courtyard ... Then the man walks down the street and walks, walks down the street under the clusters of hardened lights, crossing with people with sunken faces ... Then he feels drowned in desolation and lack of faith.

"Because I am here? What should I do? Where to go?"

It feels like one feels when you return and you know you shouldn't have traveled there, when you realize that King Avenue is only one street after all, and that Saint Louis - that enchanted name - is just a city. Big and hot by the river, a city not so far south that it is drowning in humid and tedious heat, and there is nothing that can do it better.

It was not like this in the past.

He could remember how hot it was, but how good that heat was then, and how good it was to lie in the backyard on an inflatable mat that smelled of a hot mat in the sun, and how good was the dream that caused so much sun.

And how good it was sometimes to go down to the basement to have a bit of the cool before returning to the sun. The basement, which smelled what cellars always smell: a fresh and old smell, a smell of cobwebs and dirty bottles ... I remember when I opened the door and went down the stairs I already knew that the smell of the basement would rise to find myself — fresh, musky, stale, damp, dark — and that the very idea of ​​a basement always filled me with diffuse emotion, a kind of almost visceral expectation.

I remember that in the afternoon it was so hot. And then I felt something like an absence, a feeling of absence and vague evening sadness. The house seemed so lonely in the afternoons ... Sometimes I would sit inside, on the second step of the living room, and listen to the sound of silence and absence in the afternoon. I could smell the wax on the floor and the stairs and see the sliding doors with their brown varnish and the bead curtains, I could put my hands between the rows of beads and grab them with my arms and let them collide and clink. He could feel the darkness, the varnished darkness ... and the colored light inside the house, through the small glass of the door, the colored light and the absence, the silence and the smell of wax on the floor, and the vague sadness in the house in the middle of the afternoon, in full heat.

I would sit and listen. He could hear the girl from the neighboring house in the middle of his piano lessons, he could hear the tram passing between the fences of the courtyards, half a block away, and he could smell the dry and vulgar aroma of the fences, the smell sour from the hot grass by the tracks, the smell of tar, of the sleepers, the smell of the shiny and worn flanges of the tram. She could feel the loneliness of the patios in the afternoon and the feeling of absence when the tram had passed.

Then he longed for the night and the return, the nightfall and the footsteps on the street, for the sharp-faced twins in their sailor suits and tricycles, longed for the smell of dinner and the sound of voices in the house again, when they all returned home, when Grover returned from the Exhibition.



... And again, again I walked down that street and found the place where the two corners met.

Before continuing I turned to see if Time was still there.

I passed the house, some lights were lighting up the interior, the door was open, and a woman was sitting on the porch. At that very moment I stopped in front. The light from the corner lantern illuminated the place. I stared at the house for a moment and put one foot on the first step.

Then I said to the woman who was sitting on the porch: "This house ... excuse me ... but could you please tell me who lives in this house?"

I knew that my words sounded strange and empty, because deep down I had not said what I wanted to say.

The woman looked at me somewhat puzzled.

He said: «It is I who live here. Look for someone?".

I said, "Well, I'm looking for ..."

And I kept quiet, because I knew I couldn't tell him what I was looking for. My words became more confused and awkward when I felt him looking at me. I did not know to say.

I said, "I think I used to spend a few seasons here."

She did not answer.

After a moment I continued speaking: «I lived here, in this house ... when I was a child».

The woman was silent, looking at me for a while. Then she said, "Are you sure this is the house? Do you remember the address?

"I forgot the address," I said, "but it was on Egmont Street and it was on the corner. And I know it was this.

"This is not Egmont Street," said the woman. "This street is called Bates."

"Well, they may have changed the name," I said, "but this is the house, I'm sure." The house has not changed.

She fell silent again, then nodded, "Yes. They changed the name of the street. I remember hearing that he had a different name before. When I was little, it was called differently ». She said, "But that was a long time ago.

When do you say you lived here?

"In 1904."

Again she was silent, still looking at me. Then suddenly: "Oh ... that was the year of the Exposition. Did you live here then?

I replied quickly, with more confidence: "My mother rented the house for seven months ... The house belonged to Dr. Parker." And I continued: "We rented it to him."

"Yes," said the woman, nodding, "this was Dr. Parker's house. I never knew him. I've only been here a short time, but I know that Dr. Parker owned the house ... He died ... He died a long time ago. But this was his house, yes, it is true, "said the woman.

That side entrance, where those stairs are, was for his patients. It was the entrance to his office. This is where patients came and went. "

"Oh," said the woman, "I didn't know. I've always wondered what it was for.

"And this great room, here at the entrance," I continued, "was the doctor's office. It had sliding doors and next to it a kind of bedroom for his patients.

Yes, the bedroom is still there, only now everything has been transformed into a single room. I had always wondered what the bedroom was for.

And it had sliding doors on this side, doors that led to the living room ... and stairs on that other side. And in the middle of the stairs, on the landing, a small window with colored glass. And on the sliding doors, here in the living room, a kind of curtain made of rows of beads.

She nodded, smiling. Yes, it's the same, we still have sliding doors and stained glass. There are no curtains with beads anymore, "she said," but I remember they were used before. I know what you mean ».

"When we lived here," I said, "we used the doctor's office as a living room ... until a month or two before we left." Then it became a bedroom.

"Now it's a bedroom," she said. «I manage the house. I rent rooms. All the upstairs rooms are rented, but I have two brothers who sleep in the one at the entrance. »

For a few moments we were silent. Then I said, "My brother was staying there too."

"In the entrance room?" He asked.

"Yes," I replied.

After remaining silent for a while, she said, "Why doesn't it happen? I don't think much has changed. Would you like to take a look?

I thanked him and accepted. I went up the porch stairs. She opened the door and I entered the house.

It was exactly the same. Stairs, hallway, sliding doors, stained glass window over the stairs. And everything was exactly the same, except for the absence, the absence in the afternoon, the colored light of the absence in the afternoon and the boy sitting there, waiting on the stairs.

Everything seemed exactly the same, except that I used to sit there in another time. I had sat right there and had felt a vast and wild river somewhere. I had sat there wondering what King Avenue was, where it started and where it ended - now I knew it! I had sat there bewitched by the magic word: "city", bewitched by the tram and by all the things that came, came and went, and came back again, like the shadows of the clouds passing over the forest, which did not they can capture; like the memory of another house, of the sunlight, of April and of the passing seasons; like a train, like a river, like the morning, like the mountains of our land.

And I wanted to sit on the stairs again, in the absence of the afternoon, to feel it again. And that would come back and go and come back again until I could apprehend it and it was mine and I could remember everything and I could have seen and lived it all, even though all the light of Time fell on my memory, with the dark echoes of a thousand lives , about that brief sum of myself, about the universe of my four years, that was too little to be measured, so far away, as unrecoverable as an endless memory.

Everything would come back to me like his dark eyes, his serene face. And I would see my little captive face in the dark mirror of the living room, my serious eyes and my calm disposition, and I would know that despite being only a child I would know this better than anyone: «Here is a child, my center, my seed. And here the House. And here the House listening. And here the absence, the absence in the afternoon. Oh, naked universe, I know: here I am!

And then it would be lost again, fading like the shadows of the clouds in the mountains, like faces lost in a dream, emerging like the vast and fuzzy noise of the fair [*] enchanted and distant, and returning and leaving again and returning, recovered and lost, possessed and retained and never captured, like the voices long lost in the mountains, like the dark eyes and the serene face, that dark lost child, my brother, who, like the shadows or the absence within the home, it would come, it would go and it would come back again.

The woman led me back into that house, through the living room ...

I told him about the pantry and pointed out where he was, although

was no longer there. And I told him about the patio and the old fence of boards. But there was no fence anymore. And I told him about the garage and told him it was painted red. But now there was a small shed. And the backyard was still there, but it was smaller than I remembered and now it had a tree.

"I didn't know there was a tree," I said. "I don't remember a tree."

"Perhaps there was not then," she said, "a tree can grow in thirty years ...". Then we return to the entrance, where the sliding doors.

"Could you see this room?" I asked.

The woman moved the doors, which slid heavily, as in the past.

Then I saw the room again. It had not changed. There was a window to one side, and the two arched windows of the façade and the bedroom and the doors and the fireplace with the mottled green tiles. The mantelpiece was still dark wood, there was a screen and a bed in the same place where they had been a long time ago.

"Is this the room?" Asked the woman. "Has it changed at all?" I told him it was exactly the same.

"And your brother slept here where my brothers sleep?" "This was his room," I said.

We were silent for a while. I turned towards the door and said, “Anyway, thank you very much. You are very kind for showing me around the house ».

And she said that with pleasure and that it was no trouble.

Then he said, "And when you see your family, tell them you saw the house." She said, "I am Mrs. Bell. You can tell your mother that Mrs. Bell has kept the house. And when you see your brother, tell her that you saw the room where she slept and that you found her exactly the same ».

I told him that my brother was dead.

The woman was silent. Then she looked at me and said, "She died here, right? In this room."

I said I was right.

"I don't know how, but when he told me that this was his brother's room, I knew immediately."

I said nothing. After a moment the woman said, "What did he die of?"

"Of typhus."

She looked at me in horror, with a worried expression. Involuntarily she said: "My two brothers ...".

"It was a long time ago," I said, "I don't think there is anything to worry about."

"Oh, I wasn't thinking about that," he said, "only to hear that a boy, his brother, died in this room where my two brothers sleep now ...".

Maybe I shouldn't have told him, now that I think about it ... But he was a good boy ... And I'm sure if you had met him, he wouldn't have cared.

He said nothing. I hastened to add, 'Besides, he didn't stay here very long. This was not his room actually. But the night he returned to my sister he was so ill that ... they preferred not to move him from here ».

"Oh," said the woman, "I see." And a moment later: "Are you going to tell your mother that you were here?"

"I do not think so."

"I ... I wonder what she will think of this room."

"I do not know. She never talks about it.

"Oh ... how old was the boy?" "Twelve years."

"You must have been very young."

"I had four."

And ... I just wanted to see the room, didn't I? So she came here.

"Yes."

"Well," he said vaguely, "I suppose you've already seen it."

"Yes, thank you very much."

“I imagine you hardly remember anything from then, do you? You were very small.

"No, almost nothing."



... The years fell like the leaves of a tree and his face returned to my mind.

The dark and smooth facial oval, the dark eyes, the soft and dark berry on the neck, the black hair like a raven's wing.

All this came back, suddenly besieging me. All that phantasmagoria, like the faces of an enchanted forest.

Now say Grover.

Gouve.

No, Gouve no: Grover ... Say it!

Goode.

No, not like that ... You said Goode. It's Grover ... Come on, say it.

Goode.

Look, I'll tell you what we'll do if you pronounce it right ... Would you like to go for a walk on King Avenue? Would you like Grover to take you? Well ... if you say Grover and you say it correctly, I'll take you to King Avenue and buy you an ice cream ... Now say it: Grover. »

Goode.

"You're the dumbest kid I've ever met: can't you even say Grover?"

Goode.

But, but ... Your tongue is stuck, that's what you have. One of these days I'm going to ... Well, okay, come on, I'll buy you an ice cream anyway ... »

All that came back and went out and was lost again. I turned to leave and thanked the woman and said, "Goodbye."

"Well, goodbye," said the woman, shaking my hand. "I'm glad I showed her around the house, I'm glad ..." But she didn't finish the sentence. Finally she said, “Well, that was a long time ago. You must have seen things very changed, I suppose. The neighborhood is full of new houses, even here on the outskirts, where the exhibition grounds were ... I imagine that everything will have changed a lot ».

And we didn't say anything else. We stood on the stairs for a moment and shook hands again.

Well then ... Bye.

And again, again, I returned to the street to find the place where the two corners touched and I turned to see where Time had gone. And everything was there as it always had been. And there was nothing left and nothing would ever return. And everything remained the same, as if it had not changed since then, only that everything had been lost and had been recovered and captured forever. And so, having found everything, I knew I had lost it.

And I knew that I would never return, and that the lost magic would never return. And that the light that fell, that passed and went and returned again, the memory of the voices lost in the mountains, the shadows of the clouds passing over the field, the remote voices of our relatives, the street, the heat, King Avenue and the song "Tom, Tom, the Piper's Son," the vast, fuzzy murmur of the fair, "Oh, strange and bitter miracle of time," would not return again.

The crying of the absence in the afternoon, the house that he expected and the child that dreamed.

And through the tangle of memories of a man, from the enchanted forest, the poor boy with dark eyes and serene face, a foreigner in life, exiled from life, long lost like all of us, a figure in the labyrinths blind, my relative, my brother and my friend, the lost child, was gone forever and would never return.

*** END OF THIS TEXT [The Lost Boy] ***

