Title:Bag of Meat on Ball of Dirt  
Author: Mara Altman  
Gender of Author:Female
Publication Year:2016
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2016
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: B010
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/Meat-Ball-Dirt-Kindle-Single-ebook/dp/B01DAIPQA2/ref=zg_bs_8624226011_sccl_15/138-7871239-7163565?psc=1

*** START OF THIS TEXT Bag of Meat on Ball of Dirt ***

 
I have this theory that dudes dressed in linen have already found themselves. People with dreadlocks have not. Women with ponchos and purses made of ethnic or tribal textiles are trying to find themselves. High heels, tailored suits and suitcases on wheels, not so much.

Tattoos could go either way. Ditto yoga pants.

I was recently exploring this theory about the eternal quest for identity and the meaning of life, from seat 38K of a British Airways flight from Heathrow to New Delhi. Two young German girls sat to my left as I stared out my window at the vast eternal emptiness below me and pondered my own mission in life. (More on that later.) I also couldn’t help thinking about how skinny the girls were and how they should eat more so that while in India, they didn’t shit themselves skeletal. I felt bad that I thought about pooping so much. I even considered the experience of other people pooping. It’s disgusting.

When I first sat down, they were talking and giggling too loud. I didn’t want to not like it, but I didn’t like it. Apparently, when you turn 33, you immediately start not liking it when other people have more fun than you. They were having fun and a part of me appreciated that, but the other part of me — despite how unlikeable it sounds — wanted to sew their mouths shut and then toss them out of the window. “You think that’s funny?” I’d yell as I watched them turn into tiny specks.

I don’t know what to say except for I guess I get homicidal sometimes.

Mixed in with my annoyance was also the desire to talk to them. Maybe they could be the first interviews for my mission. But I was having a rough time getting their attention as I stared in the opposite direction and said nothing for four hours. I’m actually quite a shy person. I don’t know why I didn’t consider that personal detail before I chose to go on an overseas assignment that involved humongous amounts of human contact. The truth is, I have a hard time approaching people randomly and asking them things. It makes me sweat in all the places refined ladies don’t talk about.

But finally, as we passed back our trays of vegetable curry, I caught ponytail girl’s eyes. She was the Batman of the duo. The other was clearly Robin. “Where you guys headed?” I asked.

“Sorry?” she said. It was the language barrier.

“Where are you going?” I asked again, dropping the slang.

And wouldn’t you know it, they were trying to find themselves. No dreadlocks or ponchos, so there went that theory.

They both just graduated college in Frankfurt and were on their way to work at an orphanage in Kathmandu for six months. Batman said she was hoping to find her true character on this trip. “I need to get distance,” she said, “I need to get away from the influence of my family and my social circle. Without that, I will find who I truly am and what I want.” Robin seemed less convinced. She shrugged. “I don’t know,” she said. “I guess I hope to find out which direction to take.”

I just worried for them. They are too skinny. They won’t be able to survive six months of nonstop shitting.



It doesn’t make sense.

You would think that human beings in search of something would choose a smaller place to go to find it than one of the largest countries on the planet. And yet, for centuries, all manner of seemingly normal and well-adjusted men and women have trekked to India as their first choice in a concerted effort to find that most elusive of inanimate objects: themselves. From Vasco da Gama to the Beatles, they’ve sailed, flown, hiked, hitched, driven, wandered and cycled their way toward and around the 1.3 million square miles that make up a polyglot nation once known as the Jewel in the Crown, in search of an emotional needle in a highly heterogeneous haystack. They were attracted — or at least I supposed they were — by the long-nurtured historical sense of spiritualism that has pervaded this place since the day Buddha first assumed the lotus position.

I’d been to India myself, twice before — the first time as a flummoxed college graduate with no direction in life, looking for a career amidst the curried flavors of youthful exuberance that lined the streets of Bangalore, the second as a confused first-time author staring down failure at the age of 26. I didn’t find anything, exactly; in fact, I’d mostly lost things, like my lunch, having spent good portions of my visits experiencing various degrees of dysentery and digestive upset. But both times I left intrigued — and my heightened curiosity mostly unsatisfied — by the sheer mass of men and women wandering the continent in search of emotional mirrors onto their souls. Thousands of well-meaning visitors appeared to spend inordinate amounts of time staring into the ocean, taking in temples, consulting gurus, and smoking gigundous quantities of ganja as they asked themselves what struck me as the most difficult and didactic of questions:

Who am I? Where am I? Why am I on this frigging planet?

By now, I had come to believe that I had found the answers to those existential queries. Three years ago, I married a man named Dave who had become my personal Buddha. We sat together on our living room couch in peaceful harmony and love as we worshipped at the altar of American television and home cooking, pursuing our careers and our futures. I was content, but still fascinated by the undeniable fact that, on the other side of the planet from my New York City apartment, thousands of well-meaning people not that different from me were still searching, yearning, lost. It didn’t take much more than a quick trip down the rabbit hole of Google to gather evidence. Yes, my friends — with a mere flick of your MasterCard, you too can join an ashram, meet a guru, trek to a temple or commune on a beach in search of yourself! Flights leaving JFK every hour, on the hour! Step right up for the journey of a lifetime! How could I resist? I reached for my purse and, before giving it the sort of serious thought that would have caused me pause, I’d purchased a plane ticket to India. I was going to go in search of searchers. I needed to know why these people traveled so far from home, to a place that they didn’t understand, in order to understand themselves.



I started my journey at the Delhi train station. I took a number — 236 — and waited my turn to buy a ticket. While there, I met a man with a torn shirt and stained pants. If he were in the States, I’d expect him to be yelling profanities at a trashcan, but in India, he came off as a slick traveler dude.

His name was Peter Lee. He was English and said that he’d been to India 20 times in the past 25 years, so I told him what I was there for.

“You’re trying to find people who are finding themselves?” he said. “That sounds a bit silly, doesn’t it?”

It didn’t sound silly until he said it like that.

“If they were really trying to find themselves,” he said, “they’d be too busy to talk about it.”

We watched the numbers slowly tick by — 185, 186. “Their ego is distracting them, you see?” he continued. “They should be in a cave.”

I told him I was going to go to Rishikesh. It’s a place known for its many ashrams and famous for the time the Beatles went to learn Transcendental Meditation with the Maharishi. A friend who had been there before even referred to it as spiritual Disneyland. Peter laughed. “That’s not really spiritual,” he said. “It’s a social club.”

Then in a Valley Girl inflection, he mocked the people I might meet there, “‘OH. MY. GOD. You have to meet my guru!’”

After about 45 minutes, he finally revealed that he himself had been on the search. As a small boy, he had many out-of-body experiences. He’d chant, “I am me, me is I” until he felt like he was floating above his own body. He’d lost the ability to do it as a teenager and came to India in his 20s in the hope of repossessing that oneness feeling.

For three and a half years, he renounced all material possessions and lived in the mountains. No booze and a lot of celibacy. He’d get up every day at 4 a.m. to meditate.

“Did you reach enlightenment?” I asked.

“Enlightenment is not a goal,” he said, “We are so goal oriented in the West. We are all already enlightened, but we are –—”

He paused and covered his eyes with his palms as he looked for the right word.

“Clouded?” I said, trying to fill in the blank.

“Yes,” he said. “The illusions have to fall away.”

As the numbers continued to tick forward — 215, 216, 217 — he waved his hands over his eyes to, I assumed, demonstrate some illusions falling.

“So, do you think you have to have a guru to find yourself?” I asked.

“You don’t have to,” he said, “but it helps.”

He’s a classical Indian flutist and explained that the path to finding yourself is just like learning the instrument. “I could struggle on my own,” he explained, “or I could find a master who has already struggled and who knows how to guide me.”

Later that evening, we bumped into each other again and went out to dinner. He’s been looking for himself for so long that he feared he’s missed out on one of his greatest desires: A wife and kids. He became withdrawn and concerned. “I will have to find someone much younger than me,” he said. “That’s going to be difficult, you think?”



The next morning, I took a five-hour train ride to Rishikesh. I again had a window seat and as we passed the countryside, I watched women make dung cakes — UFO-shaped cow excrement to be used for bio-fuel. I traveled halfway around the world and yet I could not get away from shit and its byproducts.

Later that day I ended up cross-legged — that’s the way everyone sits here — at a low table in Café Kennan, the café beneath my guesthouse. The room was dark, decorated with dingy pillows and textiles like the one behind me that was printed with “One Love” and Bob Marley’s face. I wanted to vacuum, but was frightened of what a vacuum might uncover. The next bubonic plague was likely hibernating inside my seat cushion. Through the back exit, I could see the greenish gray Ganges, the sacred river of India that snaked through that town. It was moving at a clip. A light breeze acted upon the dry brown grasses — the tips bent. On the other bank were mountains speckled with spired ashrams, boulders and a couple of local people taking a dip by the shore.

A group of 20-somethings was sitting around the table across from me. About 75 percent of their combined weight appeared to be dreadlocks. One guy even had beard dreads. Are those breads? It’s easy to disregard these types as oafish and lazy, but it takes gumption and determination to uphold a hairstyle so flawlessly scruffy. I know because I gave myself dreadlocks once, royally screwed them up, and ended up with hair so foul that each clump was like a Gumby extremity — I could bend each any way that I willed.

After I snipped them, I looked like an electrified alpaca.

My official stance: I may scoff, but I always respect a well-tended dread.

A baba, a holy man, sat with them, wearing a simple ochre wrap covering only the lower half of his thin, muscular body. These holy men are everywhere here, and some are the Real Thing while others are said to be con artists or “goons” who prey on travelers. Sometimes for money. Sometimes for sex. This one looked like an emaciated Drogo from “Game of Thrones.” His soles were tank treads. Like. No. Shoes. Ever. I liked the baby-fist sized hole through his earlobe and the talon-looking thing pierced through his nose.

They were passing around a joint and ordering food. I wanted to join them and ask them things, but felt intimidated. One of them even had a guitar. I’d traveled 7,300 miles to feel like I was in seventh grade.

But there was a girl in the group with strawberry blond hair, freckles and creamy skin who seemed approachable. I bored into her with my eyes to get her attention, but then every time she looked at me, I sabotaged myself by quickly turning away.

It worked anyway. She came over and squatted near me. “I’m Tzippy,” she said. “What’s your name?”

I told her. She said she’d been around town for a while, but that she was leaving on a motorbike at 9 a.m. for Pushkar. I looked at the clock; it was already 12:30 p.m. She laughed and then dropped a white pill into a glass of water. It fizzed.

I was hoping she’d be like one of the people Peter Lee had told me Rishikesh was full of: “Oh, my God, you have to meet my guru!”

That’d be a good interview.

So I told her what I was doing: Finding people who are trying to find themselves. She said she wasn’t doing that. She was just taking a vacation from Israel because the conflict had been so intense.

“I know,” I said. “My story is weird, right?”

Insecurity: It hits us at the most inconvenient of times.

“I don’t think it’s weird,” she said. Then I sweated some more.

She invited me to her friends’ table, where a swarm of flies danced around an ashtray full of joint butts and date pits. One got into my tea. With an eyebrow raised, I said to the group of five, “I drowned a fly in my chai.”

The guy with the breads replied monotone and serious, “You can’t blame yourself.”

All of a sudden, I felt like I’d taken the fly’s death much too lightly.

I also wanted to roll my eyes.

I took the moment as an opportunity to ask Breads why he came to India. He totally missed the point and launched into a long and detailed story about how he got his tourist visa.

Then the food came.

I lost the stoners completely.

After some time, I asked them where they were going after. “Well,” someone said, pointing at Tzippy. “She’s going to Pushkar at 9 a.m. this morning.”

They all laughed. The guitarist thrummed. Then Breads passed me the joint.

I wish I liked drugs more, but unfortunately, I’m one of those people who when high, must also wear an aluminum foil hat to keep the government from reading their minds. But saying no to drugs in a cool way is one of life’s great mysteries. No one ever teaches you to say no nonchalantly, like the drugs are mashed potatoes being passed around for the fourth time.

I waved away the joint like a cowboy getting ready to draw.



Deelip was the guesthouse owner. To get a lay of the land, he took me up to the rooftop. He had a diamond in one ear and wore a green sweater vest. I couldn’t decide whether or not he was creepy. He kept talking about taking me on his motorcycle to a secluded waterfall. “There’s a beautiful cave…”

We were the same height. He seemed docile. I think I could have taken him.

Then again, how presumptuous to think he’d want to rape me. I could be so vain sometimes!

I asked him to point out the direction of the Beatles’ ashram. It’s not literally the Beatles’ ashram, but because they wrote most of “The White Album” during their stay there, that’s what people call it. It was actually the ashram of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, a guru well known for founding Transcendental Meditation. Philip Goldberg, author of “American Veda: From Emerson and the Beatles to Yoga and Meditation, How Indian Spirituality Changed the West,” wrote that the Beatles’ visit to Rishikesh “may have been the most momentous spiritual retreat since Jesus spent those forty days in the wilderness.” The place is now dilapidated, but it’s a big attraction. Going there first made sense; I suspected I’d meet a lot of seekers.

Deelip pointed me toward the left.

“What do you think of them?” I asked.

“The Beatles is nice, but it is not life,” he said.

“What does that mean?”

“I don’t know,” he said. “It’s good; a spiritual place. You will feel it.”



I didn’t feel it.

I’d often considered that the ability to feel spiritual energy might be a recessive trait.

On my way to the ashram, I had run into a 59-year-old man wearing a black shirt, glasses and jeans, with his hair the white of the sand by the Ganges. He seemed grounded and industrious, like if I got dengue or ran out of wet wipes, he’d be good to have around. He introduced himself as Bjarne. “In Danish, it means bear,” he said. He’d just lost his job in Denmark, working for geriatric clients with special needs. This was his fifth trip to India. He reminisced about his previous visits.

“People who had mental problems would come here and smoke hashish until their brains broke,” he said.

When we reached the ashram, it was deserted, much of the buildings taken over by weeds. The Beatles Cathedral Gallery was a dilapidated structure full of graffiti and hundreds of feel-good sayings etched onto the walls: “Everything is inside of you” “Never give up. Always let go.” “Ignore what you just read… love is what counts.”

Basically, it was my nightmare: I was in the digestive system of a self-help book.

After two hours of exploring the large property, the only other beings we saw were hundreds of yellow-and-black spiders, sitting menacingly on their webs.



Big Bear acted as my comrade for the rest of the night. When we stopped at a café for a chai, I began feeling like I was on the right track — colorful fliers touting courses were posted like patchwork on the walls: “Choose evolution”; “Emotional blockage treatment”; “Find meaning and purpose.”

We joined seven other strangers for dinner. When people travel, alone especially, they luckily seem to become very nondiscriminatory about their company.

I waited to broach the nature of my mission until we were all sitting cross-legged around a low table, shoving various curries into our mouths. Someone immediately piped up, “Patrick is trying to find himself.” He was pointing to a young Swede dressed in shorts, a red windbreaker and Harry Potter glasses. Patrick was so eager to talk that I almost confused his sudden change in facial comportment — big eyes, open mouth, jutting chin — for someone getting ready to vomit.

After we ate, I stood in the dark outside with Patrick and multiple roaming cows. The 27-year-old seemed strong-willed, but vulnerable. I felt protective of him; one who is so desperate for answers becomes easy prey to those ready to supply what one seeks. (I think I read that in a fortune cookie once.)

He talked for a good half-hour before getting to the juicy bits. He told me that he doesn’t like the way the West judges the self — it’s all based on money, achievement and job status. “Back at home, life is all about things I don’t really value,” he said. “You need to make sufficient money to live, but abundance I don’t see the point of.”

He thinks that if he continues to live the Western way, he’ll be stuck in a life of unhappiness. “If this thing happens, then I’ll be happy,” he said, “That’s the Western mentality — the if/then mentality. People are never happy with their current state.”

I didn’t plan on agreeing with him, but I stood there thinking this little dude was making some sense. I’m an if/then person. If I won the Pulitzer, then I’d be happy. If I made dinner every night, then I’d be happy. If my husband put the toilet seat down, then I’d be happy. My if/then list goes on into eternity.

But then again, don’t our if/thens get us out of bed in the morning and keep us striving?

As Patrick spoke, a cow to the left of us was trying to eat a shoe that was on fire. I wondered if it was some kind of metaphor, but I couldn’t think of for what exactly.

Then he mentioned that he left his job a few months ago; he came here to find the self that doesn’t have to strive to be the next CEO of a Fortune 500 company. “I’m learning to be okay with what is,” he said.

He plans to take a mélange of courses and find a compatible guru.

“So how will you know when your self is found?” I asked.

He paused and put his hand on his chin. I’ve always wondered about this gesture. Many of us instinctually rest our hands on our faces when we are thinking. As if thinking doesn’t cause enough problems as it is, our brains want to go the extra mile and sabotage our chins into getting pimples. “I’m not sure,” he said. “I guess I’ll just know, you know?”



The next day, I ran into Sergio. He was one of the people I ate dinner with the night before. He was dwarfed by the Mack truck pack on his back. “Hello!” he said, kissing me on both cheeks. He was on his way to the airport — it was his last day after a six-week trip — and asked if I’d accompany him to the bus stop.

He’s originally from Ecuador, but now lives in Brussels. He came here to get traveling out of his system before settling down to get a real job, but last night he’d told me that it didn’t work: “I feel more confused than ever.”

We walked over a suspension bridge that spanned the Ganges. The path was about two and a half feet wide and a swarm of cows, motorcycles, monkeys and people were all trying to cross both directions at the same time. Everyone was being shoved and pushed and squeezed. Even though I didn’t want to, I was getting road rage. Mahatma would not be pleased. Someone’s elbow was in my armpit and a side-view mirror was in my ribcage. I had an urge to lead a revolution, to incite the people to rise up and throw the motorcycles overboard.

Traveling, it seems, also brings out one’s not-so-palatable sides. What do you do if you don’t like the you that you find?

The feeling reminded me of a cartoon I saw before I left New York. It depicted a scruffy young backpacker wearing a yin-yang T-shirt, summiting a mountain where he is confronted with his new self, dressed up in a three-piece suit, holding a briefcase with a newspaper under his arm. At the bottom it reads, “Stanley was deeply disappointed when, high in the Tibetan mountains, he finally found his true self.”

I looked around: Everyone was calm, even the octogenarian woman being pancaked to the side rail.

We finally pressed through. “I really have to make a decision,” Sergio said. He was talking about his need to settle down and get a real job once he got back home. “I’m like finally an adult,” he said, “at 36, I am finally an adult.”

He said it in a sweet voice, but I could tell he was in the dumps.

“You’re so adaptable,” I said, “you’ll be fine.”

“You think so?”

“Oh yes,” I said, “I can tell.”

Then I realized I‘d only known him for about a total of an hour. Why was I saying these things? For all I knew, he could be a total train wreck — a murderer with narcissistic tendencies and a latex glove full of narcotics shoved up his asshole.

“Maybe I met you for a reason,” he said.

Whoa, sounded like things were about to get sexy. I’d show him my wedding band and it’d all be cool.

“And it scares me,” he continued.

“Why?” I said. I was playing it chill.

“Because your name is Mara,” he said, “It means illusion. Maybe you’re a sign that I’m on the wrong path!”

He surprised me. He gets a couple of points for that.

After a moment, I remembered our conversation from the night before. We’d been joking about my name and its meaning over dinner. “Are you really here?” he’d said, laughing and poking me on the shoulder, but unlike last night, he looked really concerned today.

I tried to calm him. “I’m not a bad omen, dude,” I said.

I’ve had plenty of people rant about my name in the past. “Mara” means many different things, but nothing so great. Sergio was right, there is in fact a meaning for it in Buddhism: Mara is a demon that personifies unwholesome impulses, unskillfulness and the “death” of the spiritual life. Mara, in the Bible, means bitter. A second-grade substitute teacher was the first person to traumatize me by making me aware of that, but not the last. Once, a random stranger emailed me through Facebook that my name, Mara Altman, means Bitter Old Man, and suggested that if I changed it, I might be a happier person. Mara is also a mammal in Patagonia that looks part deer, rabbit and guinea pig. Its claim to fame is that it is the fourth-largest rodent in the world.

“Maybe meeting me means that your indecision is an illusion and once you get home, it will all become clear,” I said. It was odd, yet felt strangely natural, to have to comfort someone for having met me.

He looked melancholy and quite dubious. I couldn’t take it too personally; India makes you think that the things that happen are supposed to happen. I’ve experienced it before.

We were up the hill at this point, which means we climbed stairs that wound upward through a marketplace full of vendors selling beads, sculptures of Hindu gods, purses and jewelry. “I think a lot of people come here because they are in transition,” Sergio said, “because something has to change.”



I was soon inside Café Delmar, which was brimming with Beatles paraphernalia. Rishikesh really juiced their fame — it’s been more than 40 years since their stay here, yet you still see remnants of the young boy band everywhere. It was as if Rishikesh itself were having an identity crisis — ancient sacred spiritual site or the place some musically inclined English dudes once visited.

A balcony out the back looked out over the sun-speckled Ganges. Almost every chair and floor pillow was filled with a backpacker — reading, journaling or using a mobile device. I sat in the only chair available, next to a broad-shouldered man with a military crew cut. The 64-year-old Swede had a bouffant white mustache and wore his wrinkles like souvenirs. He used to go by Lars, but now he’s Raaj.

When I spoke with him, he was so into the topic of my research that he told me I was a brilliant genius.

When someone tells you that you are a brilliant genius — even though you know better, having put two contact lenses into one eye that very morning — it’s hard not to automatically like him more. In other words, he had my attention.

He told me how he used to be a comparative religion professor, but now lives in a camper in Portugal while maintaining an ashram for Mooji, a Jamaican-born guru whose likeness was beaming from the pendant on his necklace.

Then he went on to tell me that he’d actually managed to find himself. All of a sudden, I felt like I had a live one on the hook. “So what does it feel like when your self is found?”

“The only difference is I’m no longer attached to the ‘me,’” he said, “I can enjoy more than before. I’m not clouded by commentaries and judgment. The person on the shoulder is gone, the one that says, ‘That was nice’ or ‘You shouldn’t have done that!’ or ‘What did she think about me?’”

He flicked the air over my right shoulder. “Plunk!” he said, rattling with laughter. “Gone!”

As he spoke, he consumed large spoonfuls of gobi manchurian — spicy fried cauliflower. He didn’t seem to notice the little bits of his lunch that flew at me like shrapnel.

I imagined myself as Walter Cronkite, my voice deep and even-keeled. “So tell me,” I said, “how exactly did you find you?”

He wiped the sides of his lips with a napkin. “The truth of who you truly are has always been present,” he explained, “but overshadowed by the attachment to personal identity — that ‘who’ that is always searching for something more or other.”

He stopped and looked at me like he had just unveiled the eighth dimension of the universe. Meanwhile, I still had my pencil in midair.

The rest of the conversation was a whirlwind. His speech was peppered with all these interesting one-liners:

“You are life, you are not living life.” “The body is yours, but you’re not the body.”

I was starting to realize that there were at least two separate find-yourself camps. One type like Raaj wanted to find themselves through spirituality — gurus and Buddhist concepts — while those like Batman and Robin from the plane were seeking to find themselves through experience.

As we parted ways, Raaj said, “I’m sure we’ll meet again.” Then he corrected himself, “If it’s meant to be, then we will.” Then he took a third swing at it. “Actually, there is no meant to be,” he said. “It will happen, if it happens.”

It was as if he were trying to form a way to say goodbye that would best align with the character he’d developed for himself.

He left me feeling like it was thinking you’ve found yourself that makes yourself found.



A little later that day, the owner of a jewelry store asked me inside. I took the bait. Once inside, he asked if he could draw up my astrology chart. That’s another way to find yourself in India; there are a lot of strangers who, for a small price, will be more than happy to tell you who you are.

Instead, I asked him, “Why do you think Westerners come here?”

He put his arm up in the air as if to signal that I’d just asked him the easiest question on Earth. “They grow up and think a job, money, boyfriend and a house will make them happy,” he said, “but then they realize they are empty inside.”

He said mostly women realize their emptiness. Men are slow to notice the void.

“They come here because we have God,” he said.



In the evening, I went to a hole in the wall called the Juice House. A tiny window looked out over the river and toward the twinkling lights from small houses and ashrams on the other shore. Electronic music competed to be heard over the blenders. I sat on the bench next to a girl — brown curls careened down the sides of her pale face. She stared intently at the wall as she absent-mindedly spooned lassi topped with coconut and pomegranate seeds into her mouth.

She told me that she’d spent the past three months doing nothing but thinking. “People are so afraid of change,” she said, “right?”

She turned and looked at me with big hypnotic eyes. “They are afraid to take off their comfy slippers, isn’t it?” she said.

She wore flowered pants with a striped shirt. I wondered if she was doing that on purpose, to spite the West and our standards of matching.

I noticed her nose piercing, the gauzy scarf around her neck and the Om symbol tattooed on her hand. Those were telling symbols of someone on the search. When I asked, she squinted, but then her face softened into a smile.

“No, I’m trying to lose myself,” she said.

“What does that mean exactly?” I asked.

“The self is the ego; that’s what we are trying to lose,” she said, “You want to find who is behind that — the true you. Well, it’s not a person, you see. It’s an essence. It’s the truth.”

“That still sounds like you are trying to find yourself,” I said, hugging the wall so that a group of backpackers could exit.

“I suppose they can mean the same thing,” she said, “find yourself. Lose yourself. It’s two different ways of looking at the same thing.”

I soon learned that my new acquaintance was 35 years old and used to be a hairdresser in London. Her name was Alexandra back then, but since she’s moved to India, she’s changed it to Karuna. Her old name, she informed me, tethers her to the her she was in her former life.

“So why did you think you could find yourself here?” I asked.

“Back home I was in this rat race,” she said, “I worked all these hours, then I’d feel depressed and stressed because I worked so much, so then I’d go to the pub afterward to unwind and I’d end up spending more than half the money. There’s no quality there.”

She said that here she could spend her days studying and meditating. “I don’t have to judge my life off of society’s markers of success,” she said.

I asked her about serious things — like 401(k)s and how, since she’s jobless, she will support herself as she ages.

“When you follow this path, you need less and less,” she said, “so when I’m older, I’ll just need a tree to look at and the sky.”

“Really, just one tree?”

“That’s my hope,” she said.

I couldn’t help but imagine what the world would look like if everyone had found themselves: We’d all be seated on the ground, staring up at branches.



When I started back to my guesthouse, it was late. A local guy stopped on his motorcycle and said, “You shouldn’t be walking alone at this time of night,” and then offered me a ride. I gladly hopped on the back.

The bike revved up and for a moment I felt relieved, but then he asked, “Are you here alone?”

“Of course not,” I said. “I’ve got lots of friends.”

I’m a terrible liar.

It was less than a minute later that he stopped the bike in the middle of the path. No one was around. Pitch dark. I got off the bike quickly, but he managed to grab my arm. My heart threw a fit. The only sound was the gravel under my feet and the blood thumping in my ears. That’s it. Life would never be the same.

I could even see the headline: “In a Tragic Turn, Girl Finding People Who are Looking for Themselves Loses Own Life.”

But then it turned into “The Twilight Zone.”

“Give me a hug!” he shouted. His voice was deep and stern.

I pulled away and then stepped back about 5 feet. He was standing upright, straddling his bike. I was terrified, yet perplexed. I also kind of wanted to laugh. Did I hear him right? Then he ordered me again: “Give me a hug!”

He did not take a step toward me.

I stared at him for a moment and then ran away.



The next morning, I went to a small eatery called the Office and drank chai on the balcony. A sadhu, a holy man, sat beside me. He was wrapped in the traditional saffron-colored robes and had dreads the size of my wrists cascaded down his back. “I’d love to learn about your life here,” I began.

He slowly turned toward me. “Life?” he said. “Good life.”

Then he slowly turned away from me.



While there, I also met Bruce, a gruff and stocky bricklayer from Perth, Australia. He splayed out his hands so that he could back up his claimed occupation with his calluses. “I believed you,” I said.

“I just like to show them off,” he said.

The 50ish man explained that he was in town to get some new teeth bolted in. “You should get your teeth scaled while you’re here,” he advised, “Only two dollars!”

That, I thought, was the perfect in to tell him why I was actually here.

He responded with a bit of animosity. “The only reason why one person follows one guru over another is because they are dickheads,” he said. “That’s why. That’s my opinion anyway.”

Dickhead, that was a nice expressive word. It’d been awhile since I’d heard it used so elegantly.

After he got that off his chest, he explained that he actually had been looking for something: Since 1986, he’d been searching for the “love part of myself.”

The juxtaposition between his demeanor and what he’d just said was mind-boggling. “Did you find it?” I asked.

That question infuriated him. “Hell no, I didn’t find it,” he said. “It’s not like an Easter egg. It’s not just laying around in the grass!”

Then he stood up to leave. “I’ve got to shower before I get my new teeth put in,” he said.

Our conversation didn’t cause the slightest stir. Not one of the six people sitting with me on the ground — including Breads from my guesthouse — looked up from their bowls of granola. This stuff was normal, everyday Rishikesh talk.



I met up with Karuna, the girl I’d met the night before. I told her about the guy on the motorcycle. A part of me felt guilty. “What if all he really wanted was a hug?” I asked.

She fixed her eyes on me. “I wouldn’t walk that path so late at night,” she said.

We went to a satsung, a group discussion about Buddhist philosophy led by a guru. We gathered in an ashram, which was nestled into a hill and surrounded by a carefully tended garden, with 20 other Westerners, all wearing breathable cotton. Many had on the pants that hung ultralow in the crotch area. They are sold at all the shops. When you first see this style, it looks like the wearer took a dump in their britches, but you have to be careful, because after a couple of days you get desensitized to their heinousness and it’s very likely you’ll find yourself sporting a pair. At least, it’s happened to me before.

The guru soon entered and sat on a foldout chair. His saffron robes were loose, making him look like a bedsheet had attacked him. His name was Atmananda. He was a Westerner. A framed sign behind him read, “There is one truth, but many paths.”

I grew up in suburban San Diego, so I could understand the concept better as: “There is one Costco, but many parking lot entrances.”

He said things like “Find the connection to your essence” and “You will learn that you exist as part of everything all the time everywhere.” He also said, “There is no death.” I liked that part, but then he added, “because there is no birth” and that lost me a little bit.

Most of all, I learned that you have to be flexible to find yourself. No one could stay cross-legged the whole time.



All of a sudden, Karuna was advising me on how to put this piece together, the piece I’m writing right now.

“You should only write for you,” she said, stroking my shoulder, “and if something comes from the soul and from passion, then it will be amazing.”

“You think so?” I said.

“Oh yes,” she said, “Absolutely.”

I hadn’t asked for advice, but for some reason I was rapturous as she doled it out.



I went back to Café Kennan, the spot beneath my guesthouse. Incense sticks were stuck into the wicker walls and spun scented smoke toward the ceiling. I could hear the far-off chanting of the devout.

When I entered, I must have looked a bit down because Deelip, the guesthouse owner, came and sat next to me. I thought he was going to be ambiguously creepy again and re-up on that offer to take me to that secluded cave, but unfortunately, he wasn’t creepy at all. “West is good with the mind,” he said, “but India is strong with the heart.”

He took a sip of tea and then made sure he still had my attention. “For the Western people, you fail and then you fall down and cry, but in India, the people are always okay. Not too happy, not too sad.”

It was hard not to take what he said personally.



The next day, I went to the Juice House. Yes, I went there again. Certain establishments seemed to attract the type I was looking for (and I might as well admit it, I wanted more juice). The man who sat across from me asked why I’d come to Rishikesh. I relayed my question: Can one find the self here?

“You know what my philosophy is?” he said, “Don’t probe too deep.”

“Don’t ask questions?” I said.

“You will spend your life looking and it’s very unlikely you will find anything,” he said, “better to enjoy this life you have.”

Why did it seem like every single person here was so well versed in wise shit? I had come hoping to learn some wise shit, but it was kind of annoying when you couldn’t run into one person without wise shit to say.

“The sun up in the sky does not get to feel such things,” he continued, pointing out the window, “but people are lucky enough to be conscious, so they should just enjoy.”

His basic point, I believe, was that everything was pointless. Maybe he wanted us all to be hedonists.

He told me his name was Ravindra. He was a 69-year-old Indian man who had moved to Sweden. He was here on vacation with his friend who sat adjacent to him.

He whispered something into her ear. Then he turned back toward me.

“We have a joke,” he said, “I think it is the best joke.”

“What?” I said.

I could tell he thought it was good. His lips were pursed together in a smug smile.

“The one who lives will find out,” he said.

He and his friend suddenly burst forth into laughter. Then the electricity shorted. For the second time since we’d been there, the blender was rendered silent.

We all will die, he was saying, so no one will ever know.

“But you are American,” he said. “You think you can solve everything in a lab.”

I felt defensive for Americans. “That’s not true!”

But I’ve had time to think about it more and he’s probably right. That’s exactly what we try to do. But is that so bad? Shouldn’t we be proud of innovation, problem-solving and progress?

“Do things you love,” Ravindra advised, “but have no results in mind. The results will happen, but will always be different than you expect.”

As he got up, he left me with one more piece of advice: “If you eat too many lentils when you’re old, your joints start to hurt.”

He pulled his sunglasses back over his eyes and walked out.



I saw Karuna one more time before leaving town. I visited her at the ashram where she slept and we went out to her tiny balcony. “Don’t sit there,” she said, warning me off a cushioned bench. “There are bedbugs.”

She told me about an awful rash she’d gotten when she first moved in. We brought out some white plastic chairs and sat down. Across the way, the sun began to slip behind the hills, bathing the sky in orange. I had many questions that I’d been saving up all day to ask her, but now that I had her beside me, they all seemed pointless. Maybe I was still jetlagged. Or maybe it was something Ravindra had said. Instead, we sat in silence. We watched the people pass. One sadhu asked for a handout. Karuna waved him away.

“I talked to my mom earlier,” she said.

She looked pained to describe the interaction as anything other than perfect, but I could tell she was less than satisfied.

“In the West they just stay on the surface, isn’t it?” she said.

If she could have it her way, small talk would be obliterated.

After some time, she noticed the tattoo of an ant on my arm. “What’s that about?” she asked.

Most of the time, I think discussing the meaning of a tattoo comes off as overwrought and pretentious. I’ve seen a woman point to a design of a cartoon dolphin on her leg and then basically give an 18-minute TED talk about how it represented gender neutrality and avant-garde mating techniques. If someone asks me, I try to keep it simple — “It’s an ant, that’s all” — but something about Karuna made me earnest and vulnerable.

I told her that the ant helps give me perspective. “It reminds me of how small I am,” I said, “When I remember that I’m just a tiny piece of dust in the vast universe, I feel less pressure. More free.”

“That’s India,” she said. “That’s what it does for me.”



I was ready to leave Rishikesh for Goa — supposedly, that’s where all the travelers were headed at the moment, moving south as the cold hit the Himalayas — but getting a ticket for the 32-hour train trip had been a bit of a nightmare. Not planning ahead had its disadvantages. I’d been trying to get the ticket since the day I arrived in Rishikesh and I already paid the travel agent, Deepak, baksheesh for it, but as I was about to leave, another problem arose.

“I need more baksheesh,” he said. “Everything is full full full,”

He was exasperated and sweating, and kind of jittery like the Mafia were after him. “20,000 Gujaratis travel this month!” He kept repeating it. “20,000!”

Every time I asked a question, he clawed his face with his hands. Then he passive-aggressively threatened to take the ticket from me. “Three Israelis just asked for Goa,” he explained.

But now that I was paying a couple thousand extra rupees, I felt like I was getting conned. He was probably pocketing all the dough, but then again I wasn’t sure. “But that’s a lot of money,” I said.

“This ticket is a gift from God,” he said, scratching at his face. “Everything FULL!”

He promised me I would be on the best train. “It is express,” he said, “no stops.” He told me that I’d get my own compartment. “Only sharing with three people,” he said. Clean. Safe. Air conditioning.”



Deepak drove me on his motorbike to the bus station where I would catch an overnight bus to the Delhi train station. He probably did it out of guilt, because he swindled me. “Are you sure you want to take me?” I asked.

“Yes, I am sure.”

“You sure sure?”

“I wouldn’t have run over here if I wasn’t sure, nah!”

He took me on the back of his moped with my lime green backpack squished under his legs. We didn’t have helmets. He kept turning around, taking his eyes off the road, to show me where Westerners had crashed their motorbikes and died. “Over by that rock,” he was pointing. I thought of Tzippy and hoped she made it to Pushkar alive.

“And one by that building over there,” he said, shaking his head.

“Truck!” I yelled. He turned back around to see two bright headlights and swerved just in time. That happened about nine times.

I thought about the passport photo I had attached to my visa application. I imagined them flashing it on the evening news. It wasn’t hot enough to be my Dead Girl Photo. No one would care. They’d be like, “Well, she’s probably better off. Did you see those nostrils?” I’m cheap, though. At the time, I didn’t want to pay another 13 bucks for a new photo set to try to look good enough so that strangers would care about me.

By the time we made it to the bus, I’d died four times and had seen my brains spill out of my head.

Deepak and I were not on the same page; he was not having a heart attack. He bought a chai and leaned up against the bus. “Make sure to get there early,” he said as I boarded. “Don’t miss that train!”



As soon as I stepped inside, I wished that I had missed the train. A long aisle ran down the car, connecting cells — about 15 by 8 — that held eight beds each. Most beds were folded up except for two at the bottom, which acted as benches for all the passengers to sit. People alternated sitting deep into the bench and then closer to the edge so that the most amount of people could fit.

A conductor stopped me and said, “You must be in the wrong car.” He told me that a girl staying alone in this class was dangerous. Then he looked at my ticket, shrugged apologetically and pointed me toward a blue pleather middle bunk.

Deepak had duped me. I got screwed harder than Nina Hartley did in “MILF Legends 4.”

Not clean. Not safe. No air conditioning.

I got over it soon enough. I had all I needed — wet wipes and a rape whistle. Most passengers didn’t speak English, but I couldn’t get myself to stop working — time was ticking and there was still so much to understand — so I began interviewing whomever I could communicate with. I bombarded a young man named Salim and asked him why he thought Westerners come here. “In America, they work at 16 and try to find power and money,” he said. “Then at a certain point, they realize they are empty inside.”

He pointed to his heart.

I looked down at mine.

He said they come here to remedy the “empty problem.”

I was starting to see a pattern: For many Indians, Westerners are seen as cold-hearted bastards.

After that, I managed to find a woman who was willing to talk. Her name was Asha. “They like the food here,” she said, worrying the hem of her sari. “They are eating so much food.”

I also cornered a man named Ish. I’m not quite sure he understood my question. “Findyourselfa?” he said, squinting at me. He looked out the window. “We pass that stop.”

He may have said the wisest thing I’d heard to date.



I was on the train for two days and one night — a total of 37 hours. We ran five hours late. While I sat in that little spot, someone could have watched “The Godfather” 12.7 times. During that train ride, the world welcomed 550,000 new babies. A bamboo plant, with all the right conditions, grew more than 35 inches. It was long enough for a fly to hatch, have puberty and begin mating. And for Mara Altman, the Bitter Old Man, to almost lose her mind.

I learned to deal with unsettling questions:

“Are you traveling alone?”

“How much does your phone cost?”

“You don’t keep a lock on your luggage?”

I learned that some people eat minimally on the train so that they don’t have to brave the humid shit-splattered bathroom hole. I wished that I’d been inducted into that tactic earlier in the journey.

Also, there were no trashcans on the whole train. When I walked down the aisle looking for one, everyone started chanting something I couldn’t understand and motioned for me to toss my garbage out the window. It was odd, like having a barrage of elders sit you down and pressure you into defacing public property.

When I tried to hoard my trash in a little corner, everyone thought I was disgusting.

You start to realize, when you see these differences, that the you you think you are might actually be the you that your culture made you into.

I finally gave in; I littered.

When I did, I understood how Bono must feel after he takes a big bow.



I got into Panji, Goa, late at night and as of 10 the next morning, already wanted to leave. The place was gorgeous, a seaside town with Portuguese colonial architecture, but it was scorching and deserted — most people were out at the beaches.

So I hired a taxi, a red, four-door Suzuki with a driver named Ismael, to take me to a beach I’d heard a lot about in Gokarna. During the three-hour drive, we passed thatched houses and tropical plants spotted with red berries. Little shacks selling fresh coconuts, the vendors standing ready to swipe them open with a machete. Vibrant multicolored temples sprouted up in the middle of large fields, looking like forgotten Easter eggs. At one point, the road was so rough that Ismael’s hubcap popped off. He stopped the car and ran after it. The air was humid; every time I leaned forward, I stuck to the pleather seat like Velcro.

When we finally arrived, I saw how Om Beach got its name: The shore is in the shape of an Om symbol — the number 3 with a little tail. It was gorgeous — hills covered in dark green foliage, white buttery sand and a stretch of blue sea bigger than the sky. It looked untouched, almost Jurassic. If a flock of pterodactyls flew by, I would not have flinched. Okay, that was hyperbolic. I would have flinched, but still.

That night I ended up eating with two 19-year-old girls from Switzerland. We went to a place called Moksha Café. Most cafes and guesthouses there had names referring to the ecstatic states in Buddhism — there’s Moksha guesthouse and Nirvana, too — as if the lure to sleep there might be that it will also “awaken” you.

Tables were set under an awning. Our view of the lapping waves and hanging lamps gave the place a golden glow. After we ate, Raquel rolled a cigarette, put it in her mouth and lit it before she spoke. There was no uncertainty in her voice. “Everyone is always looking for themselves,” she said, “but they never find it.”

“Yeah,” said Miriam, lighting up her own rollie, “it’s a never-ending process.”

“You find and then you change,” said Raquel, “find and then you change.”

They both looked at me like I was a fool for having traveled so far to ask such a ridiculous question.



Just then, someone at a table across the room shouted for us to join them. Most of them were young men and their table was full of empty Kingfisher beer bottles and stubbed-out cigarettes. The girls and I quickly separated by taking opposite ends of the table. I sat down next to a Dutch guy named Willem, an Austrian named Florian and an Estonian who was so stoned that he’d become basically one gigantic pupil.

“Finding yourself?” Willem said, “I’m averse to that phrase!” He was a handsome 27-year-old with excess energy; he kept brushing his hair out of his eyes and jiggling his knee. “I think of 40-year-old women who get a divorce and are unhappy,” he continued. “They come here, stay in a nice ashram for a month and think they will suddenly ‘find themselves.’”

I suspected that he’d gotten that idea from “Eat, Pray, Love.”

Then Florian jumped in. He had a shaved head and lithe body; he looked a bit like a tragic character from a Victorian novel — pale and somewhat melancholy. I could easily imagine him staring for hours out of a rain-spattered window.

“I see it like this,” Florian said. He took out a pen and a piece of paper. He drew a simple face inside of a circle and then covered the face with tons of small squiggles.

“This is like… my English is not so good… like branches,” he said of the squiggles. “It represents all of our conditioning — your job and your ego and your place in society.”

He said he thinks of finding yourself as cracking through the branches so that light can come through to the face and mind inside. “Like the Leonard Cohen lyric,” he said, “There is a crack in everything/that’s how the light gets in.”

Willem, meanwhile, kept repeating himself. He was obstinate. “Finding yourself, I don’t like it,” he said, “it’s for unhappy 40-year-old women!”

As we spoke, firecrackers went off on the beach and the Estonian’s hashish smoke billowed up toward the ceiling. Wild dogs ran in and out from underneath the table while the owner of the establishment shooed cows away from freshly delivered food.

“I just don’t think you have to be in India to find yourself,” Willem said. “It’s all hype!”

“Then where can one find themselves?” I asked. “Can it be at home?”

“I think it’s harder,” said Willem, brushing his hair from his face. “You have to be away from your customs.”

“India is so different from home,” said Florian, “There are cows on the beach, monkeys running around, the colors and festivals, the languages and culture — everything so different — that even coming here and seeing it starts to… sorry, my English… destabilize your conditioning and open your mind.”

After an hour, just the four of us were left at the table. Florian still had some notes he wanted to make in his journal. Willem also had to go; he was late for a make-out date with a girl staying a couple doors down. Meanwhile, the Estonian rolled a new joint to hold him until he got the 20 feet back to his room.

I soon found myself under my mosquito netting with a flashlight. My hut was exceptionally rudimentary. The roof was made of corrugated steel. My mattress was on a concrete slab above a concrete floor and the sheet was torn. I had a squatter in there with me — a cockroach that lived in my sink. I could see only its antennas undulate north of the drain. This would usually disturb me, but every time I entered the shack for the remainder of my stay, I made sure that he was still there.



I woke up at 7 to attend an informal morning yoga session with Florian. He was out on the beach, sitting Indian style on the yoga mat. As I approached him, a flock of white birds flew past the green mountainside. Cows stood facing the sun, still as statues. They live in the mud, yet somehow all those heifers managed to have Pantene shiny hides.

I crept up to Florian and tapped him on the shoulder. “Are you meditating?” I asked.

“Not anymore,” he laughed.

Within minutes, a couple of German girls joined and then soon after came Willem and a girl named Shani. They arrived two minutes apart, trying to make it not look so obvious that they had just slept together.

We stood up as Florian began. “Do not look at other people and judge yourself,” he said, “yoga is only for you.”

The first thing I did: Appraised everyone and developed a hierarchy of flexibility.

Because Florian is not perfectly fluent in English, we had to do some yoga Mad Libs. It was all very endearing. “Put your hands on… what do you call these?” he said, pointing toward his legs.

“Thighs!” everyone shouted.

“Yes,” he said, “Thighs.”

He’d soon look unsure again. “What do you call those muscles that you squeeze so that you don’t let out the urine when you’re on the toilet?” he said, “I want you to tighten those.”

The lesson went on like that until the sun started to beat down like a searing hot hammer and we did a half-assed savasana pose — lying on our backs in the sand — so that we could retreat to the shade.



After yoga, Florian and I went to breakfast. We sat on the floor around a low table at my guesthouse. People just waking up took seats nearby. One man strolled out to the shore, stretching his hands over his head and yawned. A couple of women were already eating breakfast, pens moving quickly over thick journals as they sipped chai.

Florian ordered a veg omelet and a side of toast. I ordered banana porridge, which was the temperature of hell. While we talked, I had to pretend my mouth didn’t need a trip to the burn unit.

“Can you frame the discussion for me?” he said, “I’m afraid I will go out of the frame.”

“It’s okay,” I said, “just tell me your story.”

The 29-year-old told me that, three years ago, he had traveled to India just for fun, but then ended up doing vipassana meditation — 10 days of silence — and it changed him. Afterward, he wanted to continue his education and stayed in an ashram in Rishikesh. On his first day there, he noticed that everyone vomited in the morning. He thought that everyone had eaten something bad, but he soon came to realize that it was a form of cleansing. Within four days, he was vomiting too. It shifted his belief system. “My perspective changed,” he said, “I realized that everything I thought was right might not be right.”

After that experience, Florian quit his job as a high-level engineer in Austria. “I realized that I was attached to it because of conditioning,” he said, “like the positive feedback, ‘Oh, you’re an engineer. Wow!’ or that it’s good money, but I wasn’t happy.”

He now works with kids in outdoor programs and is learning shiatsu massage.

“So are you happy now?” I asked.

“No,” he said, shaking his head and laughing. “I think it is hard when you change,” he said, “change is hard.”



I thought about Florian’s experience leaving engineering and I wondered about my own relationship to writing. I’ve never been able to separate the doing of my career with the rewards and sense of identity I get from it. It’s also a good party trick: “What do you do?”

“I write,” I say.

“Oh, you write? Have you published?”

“Yes, I have.”

I receive the look of approval.

Then I feel like somebody.



I ran into Dani while he was walking on the shore. He was a 35-year-old from Israel. “I haven’t met many people in their 30s here,” I said.

It was true: Most people I had met were in their 20s or 40s and above. I had a theory that most people in their 30s were too busy to think about finding themselves; they were getting married, having babies and tending to their careers.

“Yes,” Dani said, “I was just saying to someone that I’m the biggest one on the beach.”

He was tall, lanky with olive skin. Soon, he had stripped down to his skivvies — these little blue-and-yellow striped boxer briefs — and then ran out and dove into the ocean. I jumped in after him, hoping I didn’t give off too much of a stalker vibe.

It took him a second to warm up, but he soon told me a story about how he went to an animal shelter in Udaipur. “There were lots of hurt monkeys and cows and dogs and pigs,” he said.

He went on to explain that a man who worked at the animal shelter stood out to him. He said he was very poor and had health problems. “You know, something was wrong with his leg,” he said, “he could not walk well.”

In the water, Dani mimicked how the guy walked. He sauntered crookedly and then lumbered to the side.

Then he told me the moral of the story: “This guy had so many problems, but he was still smiling,” he said. “If he can smile and be happy, then there is no reason why I cannot also be happy.”

Since I’d been in India, I’d already heard many variations on this idea. I call this the At Least I Don’t Have Leprosy Approach to finding the self. It involves comparing your situation to others and feeling better about yourself based on how shitty other people’s lives look. To be honest, I’m mixed about this method.

While it often works to some degree, ultimately, I think you’re kind of fucked if you have to depend on people who are more fucked to make you feel less fucked.



Soon I was in the waves with Derrick, a 24-year-old Canadian. He was thin and tanned like freshly fired pottery. He took going bald into his own hands. You know the type: The hair is receding so he just pre-empted it by shaving it all off. I respect that choice — accepting the inevitable. It’s like buying your own burial plot.

Over the past three days, I’d spoken to him a handful of times, but always very briefly. I knew that he’d come on this trip after quitting a job on an oilrig. I also knew that he didn’t drink.

I actually thought he was a tool when I first met him: He had a nasal voice and spoke pretentiously about his tattoos — “this Buddha signifies surrender” — but now I was digging him. I wondered how many people I’ve disliked by accident, people I didn’t hang around with long enough to appreciate.

Between sets of waves, we talked about golden handcuffs, feral dogs and how to score the best bus seat. After a while, he asked, “Do you think you can handle this story? You don’t get grossed out, do you?”

“I can handle it,” I said and I knew that I could; I can handle anything except for watching televised eyeball surgery.

We went into shallower water. I dug my toes into the sand. He wanted to tell me his dark secret, the thing that changed his life course and brought him here.

“I was sitting in a bar drinking,” he began, “and thinking about how I was going to murder this guy. I was actually thinking about murdering his whole family and setting his house on fire. I was terrified because killing this guy would feel great.”

Just before he went to murder them, he went to the bathroom. He started to feel sick. “I puked blood,” he said. An ambulance took him to the hospital and in the morning, a nurse came in. “She said, ‘The doctor believes that you may need some help.’”

He was sent to a detox clinic and for the past two years, he has been completely sober. “It freaks me out, man,” he said, shaking his head. “I was so calm in that moment. I was going to murder that guy!”

A tattoo encircled his nipple. The words were in cursive. I stepped a little closer. It read, “Forgive me god.”

“I learned that you don’t find yourself,” he said, “You get challenged.” He said it is the challenges that show you who you really are.



While I had talked to quite a few introspective folks, Om Beach was tiny — made up of about 25 travelers taking bong hits, playing Frisbee and picking bathing-suit-induced wedgies — so after three days, I was ready to change locations. I went to Nirvana Café to talk to the travel agent. The agency was outdoors — made up of only one desk in the sand. After much deliberation, I chose to move on to Pondicherry, which was on the coast, all the way on the eastern side of the subcontinent in a state called Tamil Nadu.

Pondicherry, now officially referred to as Puducherry, used to be a French colony. I suspected the travelers there would be less hippy and high — more like the Riviera than Burning Man. I was hoping there might even be a couple of those Elizabeth Gilbert Eat-Pray-Love-type seekers — the middle-aged divorced women that Willem so despised.

To get there, I would have to take two consecutive overnight trips, with a layover for the day in Bangalore.

I knew exactly what I would do for my day in Bangalore. It’s where I’d come after college and landed my first job at a local newspaper. I contacted John Thomas, who had been my editor, and made a plan to have lunch. Meeting up with him couldn’t have happened at a better moment — I needed some perspective from a veteran reporter. I wasn’t sure if anything I was hearing was adding up.



On my way back from the travel agent, I bumped into Florian. He walked me to my guesthouse. A rickshaw driver would be waiting there to take me to the night bus.

Florian was still lost in thought from our earlier conversation. “Maybe finding yourself is like a zigzag,” he said. “You find it, then it moves. You find it, then it moves.”

After seeing me off, he continued to walk away from everyone and into the coming darkness, his ear buds pushed tightly into his ears.



The driver led me behind the guesthouse and a whole new world opened up — rice paddies into the horizon like a gigantic green-toned quilt. I couldn’t believe that for the past two days, 100 feet in the opposite direction, such beauty existed unexplored and untouched. We wound our way, in the dark, on raised dirt beds to a desolate clearing.

The moon was coming up over the mountain, a gigantic orb. It was so fantastic that I had to do that really annoying thing where you point out the obvious to anyone in your vicinity. “The moon,” I said, pointing.

The driver was cool about it; he’d probably dealt with this before. “Yes,” he said, apathetically, “the moon.”

Then he asked, “Where you from?”

That is the first question everyone seems to ask, as if we’re not all from the very same place. Where are WE from? I thought. It was a rare moment for me; I was feeling absurdly sentimental about the human race. I got into the rickshaw, so full of joy and peace.

Then the rickshaw’s headlights didn’t work. The engine wouldn’t start, either. I began sweating like a hydroponic watering system.

After biting through some wires and reconnecting them to other wires, the driver finally got the engine running, but there were still no headlights and we had to make it several miles through a pockmarked dirt path. I barely made my bus in time, but I did make it.



At 64, my editor, John Thomas, looked exactly the same — smooth dark skin, salt-and-pepper hair parted to the side with a Mr. Rogers wave. He was dressed like he was still working in the newsroom — striped button-down short-sleeve dress shirt, tucked into gray slacks. His black shoes were shined so well that they reflected the glint from the overhead bulbs.

When I greeted him at IndieJoe in Bangalore after a nine-hour bus ride, I was sure to pull my shawl completely over my shoulders. He was, after all, the one who told me, 12 years ago, that I needed to dress more conservatively at the office. I didn’t wear bikinis or midriff shirts; it was my simple V-neck T-shirts that had been deemed too revealing.

We sat down in a deep leather booth and ordered beers. I was looking forward to talking about this piece with him. I was so immersed that I had become confused, unsure about what I’d uncovered thus far and what I should look out for next.

But there was a problem: In the time since I last saw him, I’d managed to forget about his style of conversation. He talks in marathons, so it can be difficult to get a stride in edgewise. As soon as we returned to the table from the buffet, he started to pontificate on the problem with America. “Leave the world alone, Superman,” he said, “go take care of Superwoman, tend to your own garden and if someone needs you, we’ll come ask for help.”

He was an op-ed writer before he retired, and I felt like he was reading one of his pieces aloud. Also, he kept referring to America as “you” as if I encapsulated all of American policy. It was disconcerting. “YOU meddle into everything,” he said. “Who asked YOU?”

At an opportune moment — when his mouth was busy biting into a piece of stewed chicken — I steered the conversation toward my question. The atmosphere was quite loud. The dishes were clanging and the music was turned up. “It’s very simple,” he said, “but we’ll talk about it later, when we go back to the apartment and it’s quieter.”

Then he started talking about it anyway. He couldn’t help himself, but instead of answering why Westerners come here to find themselves, he answered why Indians don’t have the same intentions when they go to the U.S. He said that America is bland and homogenous and people aren’t friendly. “YOU don’t talk to people who come visit,” he said, “so what would Indians learn from YOU?”

I thought about a man that I’d met just that morning on my sleeper bus, who had seemed genuinely interested in where I was from and why I had come to visit. “People come here because we are a nice people,” he’d said, “always helping people. We have respect for our guests. I hear it is not the same in the U.S., correct?”

Maybe John had hit upon something, but as I listened to him, I couldn’t help but feel my hackles rise — was my country so mean, bristly, spiny and unkind?

Whether or not it is, it certainly seemed to be the perception.

We had another round of food and then went for dessert — a chocolate fondue fountain, mango mousse and cheesecake.



John took me to his apartment, where we had tea and I got to catch up with his wife, but before long, I had to get ready for my night train to Pondicherry. He insisted on helping me get an auto rickshaw for the journey.

While we waited outside for one to pass, he continued the conversation we’d had back at lunch. “Indians fancy foreigners, especially white ones,” he said, “so everyone who comes here feels very special. That’s how it is.” He didn’t seem particularly pleased about this fact.

Just then, a rickshaw pulled up. While John leaned in to give directions, I thought about his point. It was interesting. I’ve had those experiences. You feel different here, exotic and interesting. Locals want to take photos with you. You get to say, “No, no, please, no photos” like you’re a celebrity. Westerners are attempting to feel egoless in a land where they are often treated like royalty. In a place where a tiny bit of money, when crossed over the border, turns into a fortune. “So you don’t think people are finding themselves here?” I asked. “You think they are getting spoiled?”

His silence on the subject said more than words. He kissed me on the cheek and helped me into the backseat. “Come by to see us next time you come through town,” he said, signaling the driver to take off.



On the sleeper train, I wondered if the search for the self, especially when done in India, is all self-indulgence — something that becomes possible only with privilege and free time.



I rolled into Pondicherry at 7:50 a.m. and stood in line at the Park Hotel. It’s part of the Sri Aurobindo ashram. The rules are rigid, but I heard the rooms were clean.

I spoke to a couple from England who were also waiting for a room. “Actually, I think I found myself on a small little island in Micronesia,” the guy said.

We didn’t get to continue, because we got yelled at for talking too loudly.



The town wasn’t what I expected. Despite hanging out in an ashram for hours, I was not able to find any middle-aged divorced women waiting to share their stories of rebirth. I did, however, get slapped on the butt with a dead fish when I told a vendor I didn’t want to buy one.

I didn’t speak to anyone the whole day until I ran into Peter, a 56-year-old man from Scotland. He had such a thick accent that I got sick of saying “What?” all the time and at moments just nodded, pretending I’d understood him.

For the past 12 years, he lived in Tiruvannamalai. The town is famous for Arunachala Hill, a gigantic holy mound of dirt; pilgrims come from all over the country to circumambulate it barefoot. If you live there, it’s pretty serious. You are a seeker. Someone committed. That has been my impression anyway, and once I got to know Peter, he supported that notion.

We weaved around people. The scents of cardamom, coriander and curry intermingled with the saccharine fragrance of jasmine wafting from women’s hair. Peter was in town to pick up some glasses and while there, he wanted to enjoy the cosmopolitan atmosphere. He described Tiruvannamalai as a bit of a backwater. All he did there was stay inside and “watch sports on the telly.”

From the start, our chemistry was contentious yet convivial. When I told him the old spiel — I’m trying to find people who are trying to find themselves — he turned toward me and cocked his head. “Sounds like you’re avoiding something,” he said. “You’re using other people as a distraction for your own issues.”

I stepped backward and shook my head. “No,” I said.

He laughed — snickering — like my older brother does when he knows he’s pushed a button. “So what have you done to try to find yourself?” he asked.

I told him that that wasn’t the thrust of my search. As far as I knew, my self was found. I lived in New York. I’m married. I’m a writer. I was here to gather other people’s stories and opinions. I still wasn’t even sure that the search for the self actually yielded results. The people I’d met who were searching often seemed angst-ridden and bereft and the more I was around them, the more I was feeling the same.

If there was something I was searching for, it was like a tiny butterfly that kept escaping through netting — my consciousness not yet prepared to capture it and turn it into words.

“You’re a lazy journalist!” Peter said, grinning.



We hung out the whole night. We had coffee, picked up his glasses, went to dinner and then ended up, hours later, once again strolling the same promenade where we’d met.

When I asked him about his own search, he didn’t answer directly.

“My guru said that at the end you will laugh at all your efforts,” he said.

“So what motivates you to keep studying and questioning?” I asked.

“He never said not to try.”



We ate kulfi ice cream as we walked. About 60 percent of the time, Peter had one hand on his stomach. He has a chronic case of giardia. “India is cheap,” he said, “but you pay the price.”

Though the crowd had thinned, people still lingered by the shore. A little girl begged her father to buy cotton candy. As a woman talked animatedly, her thick black braid jumped from shoulder to shoulder. A vendor rang a large cowbell, trying to bring attention to his two remaining bags of fried chips.

Soon all that was left of our ice creams were two small wooden sticks. It was then that Peter stopped by a big flat rock and turned toward the vast churning ocean. “Have you meditated?” he asked.

“Not much,” I said.

“Sit down,” he commanded.

Next to me, he sat in lotus position. He stared steadfastly into the horizon. The moon was two days past its zenith, but still looked full — like one big hole was punched into the universe.

Over and over, the waves hit the rocks and splashed us with a light mist. People milled and talked around us, but the sounds soon began to recede into one amorphous murmur. It was as if wherever Peter went in his mind, he’d managed somehow to drag me along. Words were at the tip of my tongue, but I felt like I couldn’t speak. I became clear and calm — the lifting of fog from a meadow at dawn. I felt like I’d jumped into an icy lake after running a marathon. It’s difficult to describe the feeling exactly, because I’m not one who is much inclined toward mystical experiences. It comes off sounding so corny. I’ll just say that it felt postcoital and kind of perimenopausal — there were flashes of heat.

Meanwhile, Peter would break the silence every so often to share some thoughts.

“You cannot find what is not lost.”

The silence felt like jazz and his words, when they came, like the improvised lines of a spoken word poet. “The truth is the totality, but you can never see the totality.”

An extra fierce wave crashed, spilling some of the ocean, like a glass overflowing.

“People think God is watching over them,” Peter continued. “Yes, he’s watching over them just as he’s watching over the water buffalo that migrate through the rivers” — he paused for a second — “with all of the hungry crocodiles inside!”

Then his kooky laugh busted forth once more.

We sat some minutes more. I didn’t want to move. The calm was such a welcome contrast from the stress that I’d felt for the past couple of weeks.

“You ready to go?” he asked.

“I feel like I could sit here forever,” I said.

He stood up. “Too much of a good thing is not good either,” he said. He reached for my hand and pulled me to my feet. “Let’s go.”

We hugged goodbye, but we didn’t exchange any information — no last names, emails, numbers or Facebook profile pages. It felt right, yet it felt strange. It’s so unusual these days to have a connection with someone and let it just exist in that moment — not to ask for anything more.



Late the next evening, I tried to find the rock that I’d sat on with Peter. I wanted to see if the peace that overcame me the day before could come again. I took off my sandals, sat down and looked out at the horizon. I watched the waves swell, crest and then crash. The breeze blew my hair and tickled my face.

Just as I was starting to close my eyes, a man came up behind me. He was snapping photos of the waves with his Nikon. Each time, he seemed to click the shutter about two seconds after it would have been a good shot. “Oh, hello,” he said.

I looked up. He was tall, wore a khaki vest and had a long stringy ponytail. “Hi,” I said.

This was the first time this whole trip that a Westerner had approached me. At great peril to my hydration levels, I had stalked and pounced on all the people I’d spoken to up to this point. Of course, this guy comes to me, right when I wanted nothing more than to be left alone.

He sat down next to me. “I love isha,” he said. “Isha is all about open heart and open mind.”

“What is isha?” I asked. I felt dumb asking him, it was probably his dead wife.

“It’s a continent,” he said. “You know, Thailand, Malaysia–—”

“Oh, Asia!” I said.

“Yes, isha!”

He was from the Czech Republic. His name was something like Jezourgalocha Waggouicz. “But you can call me Jerry,” he said.

I kept trying to wrap up the conversation — “Well, it was great to meet you Jerry…” — but he kept chatting away.

I tried again and again. He was not getting the hint.

I even wondered for a moment if India was colluding against me — if the subcontinent had sent Jerry to sabotage me.

Before long, it was almost 10 p.m. I had to go or risk being locked out of my hotel. They had a curfew. They also had a quote that was framed on their wall: “Be nice to people who smoke and drink, because they won’t be with us long.”

My hotel was a serious killjoy.

Meanwhile, Jerry snapped another photo. He missed the crest of the wave yet again. He stood up and took a step forward. “Do it again!” he yelled at the ocean. “Please!”

“The waves will not stop,” I said. “Don’t worry.”

There was something glorious, though, in thinking that they might.



The next morning, I woke up with a strong desire to get out of town. With only a few days left before my flight back to New York, I packed up and hopped on a bus to Tiruvannamalai, which was where Peter lived.

There was loud Hindi music and some Bollywood film was playing on a small screen. Just above the driver’s seat, Ganesh, the elephant god, was lit up with blinking LEDs.

When I arrived in Tiru — that’s what people there called it for short — I dropped my backpack at a hostel and then went to a juice stall. A Western woman was already sitting on a folding chair. Her blond hair was done up in a ponytail, sunglasses pushed back on top of her head. She had freckly sun-worn skin and small gold hoop earrings. She sat with her legs wide. Everything about her screamed middle-aged tennis coach, except for her maroon sari .

I ordered a mossambi juice and sat down to relax. After a while, she asked what I was doing in town. “You here to go to the ashram?”

“I came here to write a story,” I said. “But I’m done now. It doesn’t make sense anymore.”

She laughed. “That happens here,” she said. “You start wondering what’s the point of anything.”

To the left of us, we saw a Westerner. Half of his red hair was matted, the other half wildly shot into the air. He was barefoot and had a severe gaze. His clothes were in tatters. “A lot of people come here and lose their minds,” she said, looking at him. “They think they are losing the ego, but they are serving the ego.”

“How do you know the difference?” I asked.

“That’s the problem,” she said. “You don’t.”



I didn’t know what I was looking for anymore — if anything at all — so I went to enjoy some lunch. I ate at the Dreaming Tree Café. It was up several flights of stairs and was open on all sides. The view was in line with the tops of dozens of palm fronds.

Three expats occupied a table across the way. They were English and all dressed in white. In fact, this place had so many expats that it won the White People Wearing White Clothes on Motorbikes Award. “They don’t use salt here,” one of the expats said. “Yeah, no salt, that’s why I eat here.”

Then they started talking shit about their friend with high blood pressure. I’d never heard this kind of Buddhist shit-talk before. “She loves chanting and knows what it’s about,” one said, “but she cannot stop her mind. She just can’t.”

“She doesn’t have to stop it,” said the other, “She just has to bring attention to it.”

The third chimed in: “Well, if she’d sit still for more than 20 minutes maybe she could.” They all laughed.

Then my Bliss Salad came.



I walked around. I took in the eateries, ashrams, temples, fruit stalls, tailors and little kiosks selling hand-carved stone sculptures. Packs of dogs and random cows roamed the streets. There were monkeys sifting through heaps of trash. Sadhus, pilgrims and visitors circumambulated Arunachala Hill, many in their bare feet.

I went to an ashram and then visited an ancient yet very active temple — it fascinated the part of me that is pissed off that I never got to see dinosaurs. I hiked up a hill.

On my way back, a friend in New York texted me that he’d been having a hard time at work. He’d actually been texting me that throughout the past two weeks. I texted, “I need to hug you and give you some of my energy.”

He texted me back urgently: “Mara, what is happening to you?”



I got lost. The first person I ran into was stocky, short, with bright white hair that kind of looked like a George Washington wig, except it was a little bit more unruly and a lot more receding. He wore glasses and a shirt of Shiva that was so colorful and elaborate that I wondered for a second if it was possible for an article of clothing to be on acid.

I asked him if he could explain where I was exactly.

He introduced himself as Bharat — I later learned his birth name was Melvin — and he pointed me back in the direction of my hostel. But then we continued to stand in the middle of the dirt road and talk for 45 minutes.

He wrote a book subtitled, “How to be Enlightened While Remaining Neurotic,” and even though he’d lived in India for 35 years, he had managed to maintain his Brooklyn accent.

Something about him — his use of curse words, his three marriages, his knots of anger — made it clear that finding yourself didn’t mean that you didn’t still have flaws.

We talked about bathroom wiping methods, his recent interest in making bagels, and of course a smattering of Indian philosophy. He told me about Ramana Maharshi — he’s a guru who is now “out of the body” — but his ashram still draws droves of people. I’d been there earlier in the day, actually. In the many photos of him up on the walls — cross-legged in a cave, cross-legged on the floor, cross-legged on a boulder — I’d been most struck by the fact that his breasts were much larger than mine.

“He brought back the idea of self-realization,” Bharat said of Ramana, “and the question, ‘Who am I?’”

“Who are you?” I asked.

“I am,” he said, as he stepped backward and stretched his arms out as wide as possible, “all of this. I am the consciousness. I am that. Really, I am that.”

I asked him why he never went back to the United States. “You think I can afford that place?” he said. “The schmucks.”

The other reason was that he liked that India wasn’t stuck in the box. “If people go insane here, they don’t throw them in the crazy house, they start to worship them,” he said, “if you walked up and down the street here naked, you would start to be worshipped.”

It was tempting, if not just because the sun was bearing down on us with the heat of a thousand volcanoes.

While we talked, people he knew kept passing by on motorbikes. “That guy mediated in a cave for 20 years,” he explained.

Then a couple passed on another bike. “They are getting married,” he said. “He’s blind and she’s from Finland.”

Then another whizzed past. “Hey, that’s the postman,” he said, “I need to talk to him about a package!”



Bharat invited me to dinner with his friends — Paloma and Juna. We ate momos, a type of Tibetan dumpling, at Manna café. “They taste just like kreplach,” Bharat said.

Juna and Paloma had had their palms read by Bharat the day before. Apparently, he was a master of palmistry. The women said that the experience was so astounding that they each cried during their sessions. They urged me to try. I nodded approvingly, but said no thanks. I wasn’t about to pay some stranger — even though he had a lot of charisma — to tell me who I was.

The girls soon left, but Bharat and I stayed on. We drank hot sugar milk. While we sat there, mosquitoes ravaged our feet and Bharat told me that he remembered stuff from before his last reincarnation. He said he was fighting with them not to make him be human again. He hates being human. But they sent him back to Earth.

“Who are ‘they’?” I asked.

“They are them,” he said.

“So you really remember it or like–—”

“I really remember,” he said. He explained that he used to go back and forth between different dimensions until he was 4 or 5 years old, but when he turned 6, he couldn’t do it anymore and got depressed.

“I think I may have a few more rounds being human, too,” he said, laughing. “I’m really bad at learning from my mistakes.”

I just nodded. He looked at me incredulously. “Are you saying you don’t have people visit you?” he asked. “No spirits or angels?”

“Nope,” I said. “At least not that I’m aware of.”

He looked at me sympathetically, as if I’d just told him I never tried ice cream.

Then for some reason I still can’t quite understand, I asked if he had time the next day — the last day I’d be in town — to give me a palm reading.



We were on Bharat’s balcony, looking out over farmland. He spent an hour investigating my hand with a magnifying glass and ruler. The next hour, he spent explaining my palm — he spent quite a large portion of that telling me that I run my life like a jalopy instead of a Maserati. Then, he took my pointer finger in his hand. “This is your Jupiter finger,” he said. “It’s short.”

I stretched my finger out a little longer. “It’s not short,” I said.

“Stop it!” Bharat said. “You’re cheating.”

He shook my hand to relax my fingers again.

“When you have a short finger of Jupiter,” he continued, “you don’t have a good sense of who you are.”

I stretched it out again. “I don’t think it’s short,” I said.

“Let me do my work,” he said.

I sat back in the seat. “When you have a short finger of Jupiter,” he began again, “you are looking into the environment for mirrors that give you a sense of reality, like I am a wife, I am a mother, I am a journalist, I am gay, I am a soldier.”

He looked at me to see if I was following. I nodded. “You,” he said, “are looking for that to give you a sense of reality and without those mirrors — if I put you in a dark room with nothing to bounce off — you are going to feel very uncomfortable.”

I didn’t know how to respond, so I sat there waiting for him to go on. “Sound familiar?” he asked.

I shrugged and pursed my lips. I understood where he was going, but I wasn’t sure I agreed. “You have to cut that out,” he said. “You are not that!”

“Then what am I?”

“That’s your fundamental question of life: Who am I?”

“So say I want to figure it out,” I said, “what’s my 12-step program?”

He laughed. “I should develop that,” he said. “I’d be rich. There are a lot of people out there with your problem.”

He finally let my hand drop.

He told me that every morning when I wake up, I have to say “I’m Mara” and then list the four next things that come into my head. “As soon as you start to define yourself,” he explained, “that will superimpose over anything external.”

He asked me to give it a shot. I looked out at the view. “Go on,” he said prodding me. Reluctantly, I said the first things that came to mind:

I am a human being.

I am matter.

I am the walrus.

I am a bag of meat on a ball of dirt.

He patted me on the back. “You’ll work on it,” he said.



On the bus back to Bangalore, a conversation I’d had with my friend Kat came to mind. Just before I’d left for India, I told her that the closer I got to leaving, the less clear my premise had become. “What does ‘find yourself’ even mean?” I had said.

It was one of those phrases that the more you repeated it, the less and less sense it made. In response, Kat recited a quote that she liked. “We don’t want to find out the meaning of life as much as we want to feel alive.”

In roughly 36 hours, I would be catching my flight back to New York. I needed a conclusion — What does the search for self mean exactly? How would I tie all of this up into a neat little bow? — but instead of finding one, I watched the toddler who sat next to me. He wanted nothing more than to suck on my backpack. Every time he leaned forward — his mouth open — his mom batted him away.



Imran picked me up at the Bangalore bus station and then we went to a diner called Empire Hotel where the best butter chicken in the universe is made. We had worked together at the newspaper — he was a crime reporter — and then we eventually dated for a few months. He’s now married and has twin boys.

He looked the same, but with a few extra strands of gray woven through his short black hair. When I told him the type of people I’d come searching for in India, he threw his arms into the air in disbelief. “These people, they come here because they forgot the meaning of life,” he said, “but for me, I can easily find that by helping someone who is in need.”

He said there is more joy and purpose in helping someone than in traveling around the world. “That’s it,” he said, “That’s how I see it, so I do not understand this mentality.”

I was always in awe of his disposition. He’s someone who forwent eating for years except for the barest minimum in order to save enough money for his sister’s dowry.

“Everyone is just trying to figure it out,” I said.

“Easy,” he said, “Help other people and they will figure it out.”

In line with his generosity, he said he would meet me after his late shift at work the next day to take me to the airport for my 4 a.m. flight back to New York.



I decided to use my final day to visit some old haunts — and if I ran into any seekers, that’d be cool too — but midway through the day I got tremendously ill. I had sharp pains in my gut and I began sweating profusely. I went back to my hotel to sleep it off. When I woke up, it was 10 hours later, pitch dark and I was starving. I thought I’d grab a bite before Imran took me to the airport.

My hotel was not the kind with 24-hour room service, so I got dressed and went out for food. The pavement was rich black and shimmery from a downpour I’d slept through. Streetlamps were more aesthetic than they were functional — the light diffused completely before reaching the ground. No one was out; it was quiet except for the occasional car that swished past from the main road ahead. To get there, I had to walk down a long driveway. As I walked, a pack of stray dogs howled and barked.

When I hit Mahatma Gandhi Road, I saw some eateries advertising their goods in neon lettering, but they were all closed. I kept walking to see if I’d have luck, but every place was darkened inside. I didn’t want to go too far, because I was trying to use common sense — I was in a foreign country; it was deserted and dark. Besides, Imran had told me that, for his newspaper, he reports at least two rapes a day.

I retraced my steps. Once I hit the driveway, I felt relieved. I could see the green sign of my hotel just up the road. The dogs continued howling and barking, so I quickened my pace, but then I started to see all these scruffy squat bodies appear from behind a building. A pack of them began to sprint toward me. I know how dogs work: If you’re scared and run, they eat you. So I did all my being scared while standing still. One of the little fucktwats didn’t get the memo. It thought it was supposed to bite statues, because really, that’s how still I was.

The jaw of a feral dog, I noticed, had sunk into my calf.

We are all so dramatic — we think it’s going to be the plane crash or the murder that gets us, but then in the end it turns out to be that botulism-spiked soup can or that cute little frothy-mouthed dog.

Throbbing.

I had pants on.

I didn’t want to look yet.

When I got back to the lobby, I told an attendant what had happened. His eyes got big. “Did it break skin?” he asked, bobbing his head.

“I don’t know,” I said and I liked it that way.

He made me roll up my pant leg. We saw three puncture wounds dripping blood. “You need to go to the hospital,” he said.

I could have handled the wound. The issue was the rabies. No one can handle rabies. I’d looked it up before: 100 percent of the people who get it die. And the disease is rampant in India. I needed the vaccination.

I thought about Willem, the guy I’d met at Om Beach. He had told me about his way of rationalizing: It turned bad situations into good ones. For an example, he told me this one: “If I had not lost my bag and been delayed, maybe I would have been in a car accident on the way to my hotel.”

Once he tells himself this story, he can feel happy that his bags made him two hours late.

I’ve used a similar method, but usually to rationalize purchasing something I really want, but probably shouldn’t buy. It goes something like this: “I could have gotten a speeding ticket that would have been $300, but I didn’t, so instead I’m going to buy boots for $100.”

Instead of feeling like an irresponsible consumerist, I end up feeling like I saved $200.

That’s all to say, sure, a rabid dog may have bitten me, but maybe — somehow and some way — that was the most favorable scenario for that moment.



There I was, on the way to the hospital several hours before my flight. The situation reminded me of a conversation I’d had with Frederick J. Ruf, the author of “Bewildered Travel: The Sacred Quest for Confusion,” before I left for India. I’d asked him why people, when traveling, might be more likely to discover aspects of the self. “We usually avoid feelings of threat and doubt and death,” he’d explained, “We are timid. We think we need to stay safe and stay home, but by going out, we see what we are capable of. We see not only that we can live through challenges, but that we thrive because of them.”

As I got nearer to the hospital, I liked thinking about Ruf’s optimism.



Imran met me just outside St. Philomena’s. He showed me how it works: Before going inside, you have to buy your syringes and medicine.

I thought I was bad off until I entered. Nurses in blue uniforms bustled around the small and dank emergency room. There were six beds, all in use, above a plain concrete floor. While I waited my turn, I sat on a small steel stool. There were screams, bloody bandages and bright fluorescent lights beating down. “My stomach!” a young woman in a pink and green sari yelled.

Meanwhile, a woman in a blue maid’s dress wore bright yellow rubber dishwashing gloves up to her elbows. She — alone — was the whole cleaning crew. She passed by me with a bucket full of vomit to dispose of in the bathroom sink. No soap was on the premises to wash my wound.

Behind the nurses’ station, there was a small white board. On the bottom right hand corner, there was a quote written in blue ink: “The self in us is the same self as other microorganisms in the world.”

Something about the quote rung true, but maybe that was because it sounded philosophical yet poetic and ambiguous enough to mean anything. I wrote it down in my notebook to mull over later.

At that point, I was still under the false impression that this journey had to add up to something.

After a half-hour wait, a nurse administered two shots into my arm. One was the vaccine and the other was immune globulin to prevent infection. In the coming month, I’d have to get four more.

By that point, it was 12:30 a.m. Imran and I had just enough time before my flight to stop back at the hotel for my stuff and grab a quick snack at a food stall. I was giddy as we ate dosas under a street lamp — the adrenaline, spontaneity and adventure of the last hour had left me unusually euphoric.

“I can’t believe that happened,” said Imran. He felt horrible that his country did that to me — that it tried to give me rabies — but I felt more invigorated than I had during my whole trip.

After two and a half weeks spent chasing an idea about life, I was finally in the moment, living mine.

*** END OF THIS TEXT Bag of Meat on Ball of Dirt ***


