Title:Half Fast
Author:Baker, Randy
Gender of Author: Male
Publication Year:2019
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2019
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: B015
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/Half-Fast-Adventures-Slowly-Sailing-ebook/dp/B07XD7D6RH/ref=lp_159945011_1_2


*** START OF THIS TEXT Half Fast  ***



Trial by Fire





Storm. Just hearing that word could darken Cheryl’s mood back when we first started out. Facing a bad one was the only thing about sailing that really scared her. I worried about storms too, but my fear was more of losing our new home to one, of not being able to find proper shelter when needed and being driven ashore, or sunk. I didn’t worry too much about personal danger, at least not from a storm that hit while we were in port. I figured that even in a hurricane we’d be safe enough if we could find a snug anchorage. It may not have been logical but that’s what I thought. And now here we were, about to be hammered by what promised to be the most powerful hurricane in years, if not decades, and our chosen hurricane hole was not exactly the best the world had to offer. Maybe it was the best in the Bahamas, though, which called into question the wisdom of being here at this time of year in the first place. In hindsight that’s easy to see, but back then the weather patterns were different. Nowadays it’s not unusual to get several powerful Atlantic hurricanes in a single year, but Andrew’s arrival in 1992 marked the beginning of the end of gentler times. Poor decision-making or just bad luck—it was a little of both but really didn’t matter at this point—had put us in this situation and now we had another choice to make. After a sleepless night spent listening to weather reports we reluctantly agreed that the sensible thing to do was to go ashore for our own safety and leave Caribee to fend for herself.

It was just before noon on Sunday, the twenty-third of August, and we couldn’t put it off much longer. The water’s glassy surface erupted in a fine spray as a gust ripped across the bay, another blast from the feeder band that reached out toward us like an accusing finger. Caribee heeled instantly to starboard, then quickly righted herself as she weathercocked into it.

“That’s enough,” I said. “That was the strongest one yet. Let’s get out of here while we still can.”

For the past hour the muggy air had been periodically shredded by sharp bursts blasting over the hilltops and down to the bay. After each one passed a gloomy calm would descend over the anchorage while we waited for the next assault. It was definitely time to go, maybe past time. I climbed over the lifelines and into Stubby, our eight-foot fiberglass-sheathed plywood pram. Cheryl handed me two sealed five-gallon plastic buckets packed with things we thought might be essential in a worst case scenario, along with things we didn’t want to lose: cash and other valuables, passports and documents, a change of clothes, toothbrushes and personal items, binoculars, a few photos and a radio receiver. Though we didn’t want to believe it, there was a good chance we’d be homeless in a foreign country in the middle of a disaster area before sundown.

I wondered again if this was a mistake, if I should just send Cheryl ashore with the dinghy and stay here to protect our boat, our home. I almost said as much but a glance at her cut me off. She was barely controlling her fear. She’s strong willed and levelheaded, but with her emotions this jacked up, a suggestion that we separate would not be calmly evaluated. There was really no option, but I hated it, and not just for our boat. Going ashore meant choosing to be one of those irresponsible owners who leave their boats unattended to threaten everyone else’s in a storm, the ones all the bayside barstool pundits so roundly deride. I had sympathized with that notion at the happy hour sessions back at Dockside, but things looked a little different from my new perspective, and I had a frightened wife to consider. As the sky darkened and I sensed Andrew’s awesome power closing in I have to admit that I wasn’t feeling so brave myself. There was little to be gained by staying aboard in any case. If we got the thrashing we were now expecting I’d likely be blown overboard if I tried to venture on deck, and I could see no point in staying just to cower below. So we were going ashore. We were going for safety’s sake, making the smart move. We were not chickening out.

What had we forgotten to do, or to take? I raced through the possibilities. I couldn’t think of anything but couldn’t stop thinking about everything; my mind bounced wildly from one idea to another. We must have forgotten to do something, and this was the last chance to fix it. Did I have time to go back aboard and triple-check that the bilge pump float-switch was turned on? No, time was up.

Cheryl snapped the lock on the companionway hatch and climbed into Stubby. I pulled the starter cord on the Suzuki two-horsepower outboard. The little motor buzzed to life and we headed off toward Hatchet Bay’s south shore, toward the thick palm tree we’d scouted out earlier. We headed south but were looking north, over our shoulders to Caribee. Would we ever see her again, or would we lose her like a couple of hopeless novices? We were two weeks into our first cruise.

Crossing the bay between anchored boats, mostly unattended now, I saw that still more, mainly Bahamian fishing vessels and workboats of various sizes, were entering the bay. Andrew swatted at them with his leading gusts like a cat toying with dazed mice. Why had they left it until so late to seek shelter? When Stubby’s bow hit the beach we piled out, removed the motor, unloaded our gear and lugged the empty dinghy a short way up the steep hill to where the sturdy palm was rooted. We tied her painter securely to the tree, emptied our gear from the buckets and used them to carry harbor water to the dinghy, filling it completely. I wanted to weigh it down so that the wind wouldn’t have a chance to pick it up and beat it to pieces. Satisfied, we repacked the buckets and carried them and the lightweight Suzuki motor toward the concrete school building that somebody in the local hierarchy had designated a shelter. We walked past two old Bahamian men nailing thin slats of pine over the windows of a fragile wooden house. Too little, too late. The sky was darkening and the gusts were coming fast and strong as we neared the Alice Town schoolhouse.

The pink-beige building looked sturdy enough. The only obvious downside was that it sat at the crest of a hill so would be exposed from all directions to the full brunt of the wind. We ducked through the front door to find surprisingly few people sheltering in the big un-partitioned classroom: maybe fifteen nervous cruisers (including five kids) wearing foul-weather jackets and as many bantering Bahamians, mostly children. John and Joyce from the motor-sailing yacht Mystique stood in a corner with a few of their belongings. They had their parrot Chimmy with them, in his cage. We knew them because they’d set out their anchors at the north end of the bay too, making us neighbors.

“Where are all the other cruisers?” I asked John.

“I was wondering that myself,” he said. “I know most of them aren’t on their boats. I heard that some went down to Governor’s Harbor to stay in a hotel.”

“I wouldn’t want to be that far away from my boat.”

“I wouldn’t either. You never know what might happen, and if you’re not here...” He shrugged.

“Do you think we’ll be okay in here?” Cheryl asked.

“It’s a strong building,” John said, “but it sounds like Andrew’s a bad boy.” Cheryl darted a nervous glance at me. We had looked at a few unfinished concrete block structures while walking through town the day before and discussed whether it might be safer to shelter in one of them if we decided to leave the boat. After thinking it over we settled on the school.

“We’ll be fine,” Joyce said brightly, “don’t worry.” She sounded like she didn’t have any doubts. Looking at the concrete walls of the school I had to agree, but I didn’t mention my concerns about the plywood roof.

“Yeah, we’ll be fine,” I said. “I’m going to go out front and look at the harbor while I still can.”

“Stay here!” Cheryl said, alarmed.

“It’s okay. I won’t be far away and I can get back fast. I wanna see what’s going on down there.”

The school was set back two hundred feet from the edge of a slope that offered a good view of the harbor below. Two of the cruising men went out with me to look. The sky was a heavy black sheet. The wind was already fierce, a steady forty knots in the lulls between vigorous gusts that exploded without warning. We hunched over and approached the overlook, crouching, feet widely spaced for balance.

Unbelievably, another boat was only now coming in through the cut, this one a local lobster boat, a big one, maybe eighty or ninety feet long. We watched spellbound as they attempted to anchor. There were five or six dreadlocked young men shoving what looked like engine blocks over the bow. The makeshift anchors were attached to lengths of rope that tangled together even as they released them.

“That’s not going to work,” I said.

“Some kind of seamanship, huh?” said one of the cruisers. “Where do they learn that stuff? You’d think with that much windage they would at least use some real anchors. I just hope they don’t drag in my direction. Maybe they’ll blow ashore straight away, before they have a chance to take too many boats with them.”

I couldn’t watch any longer, and not just because the scene was so depressing. The wind was quickly reaching the point where it was dangerous to be out lurching around; the air was thick with spume and grit, opaque. It was getting harder to make out details down in the bay. Chunks of debris were being picked up by the gusts and flung downwind at unnerving speeds. A slab of galvanized metal roofing rocketed past a few feet in front of me. I had an image of it slicing through my neck like a machete. We all scurried back to the school in a crouch, pushed through the heavy wooden doors and barred them behind us.

“Don’t go out anymore,” Cheryl said, relief evident in her tone.

“I don’t think any of us will be going anywhere for a while; it’s blowing like pure hell out there.”

There were no more refugees in the school now than there had been before we’d left. I thought that was odd considering the flimsiness of many of the island houses. Maybe they had found better places to hide. The screeching outside was growing steadily more insistent, pressing in, penetrating the walls and roof. Chimmy the parrot had gone ominously still and silent. My ears started to pop with the falling barometric pressure, like they do when you’re driving up a mountain highway or ascending in a jetliner after takeoff.

A young blond woman named Debbie from one of the sailboats was there with her son and daughter. She talked on a handheld VHF radio to her boyfriend who was riding out the storm onboard their boat. She relayed condition reports as he called them in: Dennis says it’s blowing really hard in the bay but nobody has dragged as far as he can tell; Dennis says it’s getting hard to see because of the spray; he says the gusts are heeling the boat forty-five degrees; he says the rigging is shrieking like a banshee. We could have guessed that last part.

A cruising couple with two young kids had a portable AM radio tuned to a commercial station in Nassau, the radio’s speaker pressed to the man’s ear. He suddenly blurted out that the eye was over Nassau right now; Andrew was already past us. This announcement sparked an instant shouting debate: Who said that? The reporter. She’s in Nassau, on the ground. It’s bullshit; I don’t care where she is. That’s right, it just now started to blow here; no way it could have reached Nassau. I hope it is right. It’s not even really here yet, much less at Nassau. Maybe it missed us and these are only the outer bands. Yeah, the eye could be in Nassau now if it missed us, couldn’t it? It hasn’t missed us. You can’t know that.

A rising roar culminating in a shuddering crash cut off the debate. We all involuntarily ducked as the building shook with the impact of something heavy smashing into an outside wall. What was that, a car? Couldn’t be. The lights went out. The room was plunged into the murky half-light that would define our world for the rest of this ordeal. Cheryl was biting her lower lip, her eyes darting, taking in the walls and the underside of the roof. I smiled calmly at her. She wasn’t buying it. I guess I didn’t look too calm, probably more like a grinning psychopath. Debbie was yelling something to Joyce, looking panicky. I put my mouth to Joyce’s ear and shouted a question. “What’s she saying?” I jammed my fingertips into my ears and leaned in close for her shouted reply.

“She says Dennis is gone, off the air. He doesn’t answer her anymore.” I looked at Debbie and tried a smile, made an “O” with my fingers: it’s okay. I figured his radio antenna had probably just blown off of the boat’s masthead and he was okay. Their boat was a heavily built aluminum ketch with several big anchors down.

The din grew louder still. My ears were popping steadily with the falling barometer. I saw that everyone was working their jaws, trying to relieve the pressure and clear their ears. Cheryl was yelling something. I couldn’t make out a single word, but I didn’t have to hear her to know that she was freaking out. I leaned closer.

“THE BUILDING IS BLOWING AWAY!” She screamed it at the top of her lungs. I shook my head and hugged her close. She was trembling. My ear popping was almost continuous now, meaning the pressure was falling faster and the eye getting closer. The sound level was truly horrific. I stood against the north wall by Cheryl and kept my fingers pushed into my ears, wondering why I hadn’t thought to add earplugs to our list of essential items. Do that next time. Yeah, right. There would never be a next time for this if I could help it. Time slowed to a crawl, and the roar that blotted out all seemed to go on forever. But as loud as the continual screeching was, there were moments when there came crashes that were even more deafening. From time to time some heavy object would slam the building’s walls, layering a thunderous boom over the top of it all. The deep thuds pounded my rib cage like the bass guitar on the front row of a rock concert and the whole structure could be felt to quiver, seemingly even the gritty concrete floor. I began to wonder how many such impacts the walls could take before they would finally collapse. I kept glancing up at the roof, thinking of weak points where the wind might gain a hold and start peeling it away. After a while the chaos practically became routine, a sort of new normal, or maybe I was just emotionally exhausted by it all and didn’t even care anymore. I guess you can get used to anything if it happens to you long enough. I searched Cheryl’s face, wondering if she felt the same, but she just looked terrified. How long can you stay terrified? Can you get used to that, too?

I was startled from my reverie. Something was different. I realized that my ears had stopped popping some time ago and the noise wasn’t quite so loud. Was it? The storm seemed to be abating. The change was at first gradual, then suddenly impossible to mistake; the power of the awful uproar had plummeted dramatically. Everybody noticed it. They stopped staring blankly ahead, perked up and started a lively discussion about what was happening outside: Is it over? No, it’s just the eye. How do you know? It stopped too fast; I’ve been in a few of these; the wind will come back from the south now. Do you think our boats made it? Is it safe to go out and look? No, the wind will fill in fast when the eye passes; you might get caught before you could get back. I might go take a quick look. It’s too dangerous. I’d like to get a look at the harbor. So would I. Don’t try it; just wait.

The harbor was on all of our minds. Now that the personal threat had passed, or at least seemed to have for the time being, worry shifted to our boats braving the tempest down there. For most of us our boats were our homes, and for some represented the entirety of our worldly possessions. As I imagined most of the others had done since we’d first bolted the door and shuttered ourselves in, I’d held on to a image of Hatchet Bay, rolling it around in my mind, examining it from every angle. I’d tried to guess the wind direction (mostly north up to now I reckoned) and strength (well over a hundred knots, surely, and God-knows-how-much in the gusts). I visualized which direction Caribee might be pointing, what might be in front of her, which anchor was taking the most strain, whether another boat was likely to have dragged down on her. I had a clear image of what I had last seen, but it was a pointless exercise. I couldn’t begin to know what might have happened since we’d come inside, and even if I did there was absolutely nothing that I could do except wait. But none of that stopped me from thinking about it, and about how we’d ended up here. I thought about the day—could it really have just been five days ago—when we first motored in through the narrow cut, saw the empty, virtually landlocked bay, and thought we’d found the best hurricane hole in the Bahamas. Sadly, we’d probably been right.





◆◆◆



It was taking forever to reach Eleuthera. The island grudgingly inched higher into view hour by hour as we crept forward, but whenever I looked up from my book the skinny strand of limestone and sand never seemed much closer. Throughout the long afternoon Caribee’s old Volvo droned along, driving us through the sluggish air, its twin diesel cylinders thumping monotonously while the autopilot steered. At least we weren’t fighting a headwind. The air was hot and heavy, and without the usual breeze was sticky on our skin. The wind had been our friend throughout the night—a light northeasterly that let us easily sail from Chub Cay to the Rose Island pass—but slowly abandoned us as we crossed onto the shallow banks east of Nassau. By mid-morning we’d dropped all sail and fired up the “iron genoa”.

Cheryl eased her impatience with our slow progress by retreating into Tom Clancy’s Clear and Present Danger, part of the secondhand paperback library we’d loaded aboard back in the Keys. She looked up from the page, glanced across the bow at the distant smudge of land and sighed heavily. “Are we going to make it before dark, or not?”

“Sure.” She looked at me over the top of her sunglasses and raised a questioning eyebrow. “I don’t know, maybe. If we don’t we can either go through the cut in the dark or anchor out on the bank ‘til morning.”

Neither of us wanted to go through at night since we’d never been there before. Hatchet Bay is a manmade harbor that was formed in the 1940s when a pass was dynamited through the solid limestone barrier that separated a brackish inland lake from the sea, creating an all-weather port where goods could be loaded onto and off of island schooners. The cut is only ninety feet wide, with sheer walls that would be unforgiving in the extreme to the hull of a fiberglass sailboat. There were no working navigation lights marking the pass.

We reached it with half an hour of daylight to spare. The failing light turned the ash gray limestone facades of the cut a pale magenta, somehow making it feel even narrower than its reported width. We motored down mid-channel, constantly glancing from side to side in order to make sure that we really were in the center and not drifting toward one of its unyielding faces. Three hundred feet past the entrance we popped out the other end and into the harbor. We need not have worried about crowding; we were the only boat in the flat-calm bay except for a few closely spaced sailboats swinging to moorings at the far south end. We dropped our anchor as darkness descended, had drinks followed by a simple dinner and turned in for some much needed sleep.

On Wednesday morning we launched Stubby and took a dinghy tour of the bay, scouting for the most protected spot. The moored sailboats to the south turned out to be unoccupied charter boats in storage. We found it remarkable that we were the only cruising boat here, but Tropical Storm Andrew was losing strength and still more than fifteen hundred miles away, so probably we were being unduly cautious. We could put off preparations now that we were on the scene and clearly had the pick of the bay for anchoring. I thought we might not have to prepare at all if Andrew would only veer off to the north as forecasted, but Cheryl insisted that we start laying out anchors right away.

“But that’s such a pain, and we probably don’t even need to,” I reasoned. “Let’s just wait ‘til tomorrow and see what happens.” She wouldn’t hear of it, so I relented and we began the hot and heavy work of laying out our heaviest ground tackle. We’d bought Caribee already equipped with five big anchors and plenty of rode, both nylon and chain, so were well equipped.

The rap against Hatchet Bay has always been that even though it looks like a safe harbor, the holding is poor. The deep layer of sediment deposited when it was a natural inland lake has given it a mushy bottom, and though anchors tend to sink deeply into it they sometimes break free unexpectedly, with potentially disastrous results. We could do nothing about that, but we hoped to compensate by using our extra-heavy ground tackle and good technique. We worked from Caribee’s bow and from the dinghy, spending long sweaty hours laboring under the scorching sun. We spread a triangular web, with our five heavy anchors divided among three rodes, one of them all three-eighths-inch chain. Even with the bay’s questionable bottom we felt that this would give us a solid connection, no matter the wind direction. After we’d finished we rewarded ourselves with a couple of ice-cold Kaliks sipped in the cool shade of a sleepy little Alice Town bar, the Forget Me Not pub. We took a lazy afternoon stroll along the village’s quiet streets, which showed no sign that anyone was even thinking about a storm.

The next afternoon brought the first hint of trouble to come. Two sailboats came single file through the cut just as we were finishing our lunch in the cockpit. One headed directly toward our web of anchors. I jumped into Stubby and made to head them off, intercepting the offending boat just as the crew was preparing to drop their hook over one of our rodes. I pointed out the placement of our anchors to the captain, and he readily agreed to move farther south. It would be just as detrimental to his boat as to ours if our anchors were to foul. Three more boats came into the bay before sundown, and I had to politely warn two of them away. One of the captains seemed annoyed, but didn’t press the point. Our empty bay was filling up. Andrew had continued his westward drift, and though he was still only classified as a tropical storm and not a hurricane, it was clear that other cruisers in the area were starting to take notice, and shelter.

The situation deteriorated quickly on Friday morning. Andrew seemed to have drawn a bead on Eleuthera, and was forecasted to intensify over the next twenty-four hours. Half a dozen sailboats arrived in the bay before noon, and I had to aggressively defend our territory against two of them. Tempers flared. We had priority by right of first arrival, but their anxiety about finding a good spot led to disputes.

“Man, there’s a storm on the way, you can’t take up the whole damned harbor,” one captain shouted, the veins of his neck visibly inflated.

“My anchors have been down for two days and I didn’t see you around when I dropped them. You should have come in earlier if you wanted to get the best spot.” I was in the right and he knew it. He glared with hostility but moved on. As morning turned to afternoon more cruising boats and a few local workboats dribbled into the harbor in ones and twos. I continued to defend our spot when needed, but it was getting to be a full time undertaking, and boats were beginning to encroach on our safe zone. I’m not confrontational by nature and was growing weary of arguing.

We had been progressively stripping more gear off of Caribee’s decks and rigging as the storm drifted closer, in order to reduce windage: sails, halyards, solar panels, dodger, weather cloths, Aries vane, jerry cans—everything removable was coming off by Saturday. We had to stop work in frustration at least once every hour so that I could go shoo boats away from our anchors. I was fighting a losing battle, and in truth I saw their point; we were now taking up an inordinate amount of space considering the number of vessels arriving on the scene. All that formerly empty space was chock-a-block with boats. In the end I just gave up, even assisting some of the latecomers with anchoring, in a form of managed retreat. I tried to position the smaller, less potentially damaging boats closest to us before bigger ones could move in, hoping to prevent an undesirable situation from becoming catastrophic. By Sunday morning there were more than two-dozen vessels of various categories and sizes anchored, some quite poorly. Squally feeder bands lashed the harbor as the Johnny-come-latelies and the engine block boys poured through the cut, adding a whole new layer of jeopardy to the already-anchored boats. The situation had become a fiasco.





◆◆◆



The front door of the schoolhouse boomed with pounding fists and shouts from outside. People wanted in. Two local men pulled the two-by-six hardwood bar out of its brackets, letting the doors burst open and slam against the inside walls. A pack of Bahamians stampeded through, wild-eyed and animated, illuminated within the dim room by the light streaming through the doorway above their heads. They may have taken Andrew’s threat lightly before the show started but they sure were believers now. They were taking advantage of the eye’s passage to find a better hiding place for the second half. At least fifty new people streamed in. I spotted several young guys with dreadlocks in the swelling crowd. They looked like they were from somewhere down-island, or at least wanted to look the part. I was sure they were the crew of block throwers off the lobster boat, and knew they’d most likely been in the harbor during the worst of it. I wanted to know what they’d seen, so I asked one of them.

“Dem boats all gone, mon. In a big pile behind da pier,” one said.

“Yeah, we jump off of da Gregory Town right onto da road and run past dem boats. Dey a mess, all mashed up,” said his buddy.

Bad news, but I knew that it meant little with regard to Caribee. The boats these guys were talking about were most likely the unmanned charter boats that the caretaker had rafted together behind the massive concrete quay the previous day. Still, the spot where they’d been rafted was one I’d thought safe, since the quay was easily seven feet above mean sea level.

I spotted Dennis flowing in with the stream of Bahamians, the only white face bobbing in the current of new arrivals. Debbie saw him too, and rushed toward him with her kids in tow. I worked my way through the swelling crowd to where they stood. Once he’d had a minute to reunite with his family, I wanted to find out what he’d seen, too.

“What happened?” I asked. “How did you get off your boat?”

“I jumped off when she hit shore,” he said, shaking his head.

“Oh man, I’m sorry. Maybe you can get her off. Did you see our boat?”

“I couldn’t see a thing after it really started blowing, but she was sitting pretty the last I saw of her,” he shrugged. “Mine’s done for, I’m afraid. I dragged all the way to the south end of the bay and washed up against the rocks, and I didn’t even know I was dragging ‘til I hit. I dragged a quarter of a mile and didn’t even know it. Can you believe that? I jumped to shore and hid behind a concrete foundation ‘til the wind dropped. Oh man, my boat’s half full of water.” He shook his head and looked at the floor in dejection.

“Maybe it’s not as bad as you think.” He didn’t answer, just kept looking down, shaking his head. Well, it didn’t sound good, that was for sure, but I guess it was the kind of carnage we had all expected. There was still hope; only Dennis had a good reason to think he’d already lost his boat, but it was depressing to hear about all the destruction, and to know that it would start all over again at any minute. It had been just over two hours since we’d come inside the building, so Andrew was moving fast. That was the only good thing that could be said about this storm.

I didn’t have long to think about it before the roaring started to build again, pitching higher and louder by the minute. Somebody slammed the doors shut and dropped the bar into place. The violence surged to full power much faster this time, but there was something different about it, a change in tenor that was hard to define. It was the wind’s direction; it was coming from the south now, and that somehow gave it an entirely different character. The air in the big open room filled with a fine mist, almost a fog. It tasted salty. It took a moment for the implications of this to register, but then I realized that the wind had to be picking up salt water from the shallow banks outside the harbor, two hundred feet below the schoolhouse and a quarter of a mile away. Unbelievable. It just didn’t seem possible that a heavy salt spray could be driven so far uphill and so far from the sea, and how was so much of it getting into the room anyway? People started backing away from the south wall; the crowd parted around a window and we could see that one of the shutters had a space at the bottom. It was less than an inch wide, but the salt spray blasted through it with the force of a pressure washer. Someone came up with a plastic tablecloth and two Bahamian men tried to stuff it into the crack, but it kept blowing out before it could be wedged in far enough to stay. We would just have to endure the salt spray.

There was a terrific roar from overhead followed by an outburst of screams. A section of roof had ripped away at the southwest corner, setting up a whirlwind inside the room and spraying even more saltwater onto everyone. The screeching wind now had a focal point—the gash in the roof. Streaks of debris shot past the hole, silhouetted against the gray clouds above. Everyone was trying to cover their heads with whatever they could find: jackets, raincoats or just their arms and hands. Cheryl covered her ears and squatted to the floor, dropping her head between her knees and squeezing her eyes shut. I crouched beside her, tried to tell her it would be okay, but I wasn’t convinced of what I was yelling. I imagined that the wind now had some leverage and it was just a matter of time before it peeled away a sizable section of the roof, maybe the whole thing. I heard a ripping sound and looked up to see another half-sheet of plywood missing. While I watched, another full sheet, a four-by-eight foot section, simply vaporized and vanished downwind. At least the heavy chunks of lumber were being carried away and not thrown into the room on top of us. The rest of the roof held for a while before sheets of plywood again started peeling away in a row along the western end of the building, one after the other, like the edge of a sheet of paper being torn off. The resulting swirl of wind roughly buffeted everyone and everything in the room, triggering a fresh and passionate round of wailing, mostly from the Bahamian women. The women’s wails blended with the shrieking wind to produce a truly hellish racket I hope never to hear again. Water poured through the new hole, too. There were at least two inches of water on the floor now, but more than that must have come in through the gaping hole. It had to be draining out somewhere, probably under the doors. There was nothing to be done except crouch in a pool of water, cover our heads, and wait. And wait. On and on it went, the screaming roar, the water cascading onto our heads, the wind gusts pummeling us. But the roof didn’t lose any more plywood.

At last I noticed my ears popping again. The barometer was rising. The noise level was dialed down a couple of notches and the buffeting of the gusts softened. Soon the salt spray stopped coming in. It was obvious that the storm was finally leaving us. Expressions took on a hopeful look. I think we all realized that it was really over now, that we’d made it. It wasn’t long before people started talking about going outside for a look around. All of us wanted to know if we had a place to sleep left, the locals as well as the cruisers. It was five-thirty in the afternoon. There were maybe two hours left until sunset, so if we could get outside soon, we might be able to get back to Caribee before dark. Assuming she was still there. It didn’t sound too bad outside after what we’d been through, so it wasn’t long before some of us decided to give it a try. We unbarred the doors and let them swing open.

It was immediately apparent that it was still blowing harder than we’d thought, but had moderated to the point where it seemed reasonable to chance a quick look. A few of the cruising guys and a couple of Bahamians crouched down and went out the door. I grabbed the binoculars and followed, hoping to make it to the overlook and find our boat still floating. Cheryl didn’t protest this time, but stayed behind to wait.

I stepped into a scene of utter devastation—snapped-off palm tree stubs wrapped with panels of sheet metal, sections of houses plastered against concrete foundations, cars with shattered windshields, debris strewn about and piled in drifts. Downed trees and power poles were everywhere. My other main impression was that it was still blowing too hard to be out walking around. But it was possible to walk, just. The wind was only picking up smaller chunks of stuff now, not heavy things, so I kept moving toward the overlook. I advanced slowly, leaning back against the pressure of the wind to keep it from blowing me forward. Every now and then a strong gust would threaten to knock me off my feet and I would have to go down on one knee and put a hand on the ground to keep my balance.

When I reached the crest I didn’t need binoculars to see that the bay had been virtually wiped clean of boats. There were only three left floating, but I couldn’t tell through the spume and mist if one of them might be Caribee. The wind made it hard to steady the binoculars well enough to get a clear view, but I eventually caught enough fleeting glimpses of the three floating sailboats to be sure that none of them were ours. My heart sank. I felt physically ill. I scanned the shoreline through the haze, concentrating on the area along the north side where we had set our anchors. I could see five or six hulls in the same general area, but couldn’t make out enough detail to be sure if one of them was ours. I spotted the bottom of a hull with splotchy blue bottom paint that was in the right area. I squinted thorough the binoculars, trying to make out the shape. It had to be her; the color was almost right (though our paint had not been splotched), the size looked right and she was near where we had been anchored. The hull was lying on its side on the rocky shore, moving back and forth as the waves broke across it. I knew in my heart that it was our boat and felt sick just looking at it. She would be holed and filled with seawater soon, if she wasn’t already.

I made my way back to the schoolhouse to tell Cheryl what I’d seen and get us moving toward our boat. The wind had started dropping quickly now and there were people outside, fanning out and gaping in astonishment at the destruction. I told Cheryl we needed to collect our Suzuki outboard and our buckets of gear and try to get to Caribee as soon as possible.

We picked up our stuff and walked to the tree where we had left the dinghy. I didn’t feel good about the chances of the tree still being there, which might mean that we would find Stubby missing or destroyed. Most of the palms along the way had been uprooted or broken off. Houses were missing their roofs. Whole buildings were missing; even some of the concrete structures we had considered for shelter had been knocked down. Power lines snaked along the ground, their supporting poles blown over or snapped in two. Furniture, clothing, small appliances and objects that defied identification littered the road.

When we reached the dinghy we saw that the palm tree had indeed blown over, but had luckily blown away from the dinghy and not crushed it. It was still lashed to the tree’s trunk where it lay on the ground. The water level of the bay was just a few feet below Stubby, and we could see from the debris line that it had reached almost to the base of the tree at its maximum height, meaning there had to have been a nearly fifteen-foot storm surge inside the bay. Could that even be possible? How could so much water come through such a small opening so fast? There must have been an unbelievably fierce current in the narrow pass that I couldn’t even visualize.

Looking out from the shore it was clear that it would be hopeless to try to reach Caribee in a dinghy. The choppy waves were still much too big, almost four feet from the looks of them, and breaking heavily along the northwest shore. We decided to leave the dinghy for now and walk around the edge of the harbor to where our boat was lying on the rocks. We lugged our gear along the bayside road, passing several beached boats with varying degrees of damage. Teenage Bahamian boys were already “salvaging” some of them. This was not really unexpected, as the islanders have a long history of wrecking—salvaging ships that have foundered on the country’s shallow banks or rocky shores. Wrecking, along with the smuggling of contraband into the States, was a principal means of livelihood for the islanders in the days before tourism became a mainstay of the economy, and tourism had not really reached Eleuthera in any meaningful way. It has been said that “Wreck ashore!” is the oldest cry in the Bahamas, the call to action for everyone to rush down to the beach and help themselves to the plunder. There is even some compelling evidence to suggest that ships have been intentionally lured onto the rocks by the creative relocation of navigation lights and markers. We could no longer do anything to keep our boat off the rocks, but if we could beat the wreckers to her we could protect whatever was left of our property.

We walked about a mile along the road before reaching a point where we had to veer off through the scrubby underbrush to reach Caribee. It didn’t take long before our progress was halted. The problem was that the water was still way too high, higher than our heads judging by the submerged bushes. We had to abandon our plan for the time being. There was nothing left to do but turn back and try to find a place to spend the night, which seemed well nigh impossible. The only positive was that if we couldn’t reach our boat, it was unlikely that the salvagers would be able to either, at least for now. Besides, they had much better walk-up prospects alongside the road. Our immediate problem was that the only possible place we knew of where we might sleep was back at the schoolhouse, a depressing prospect at best, and we didn’t want to be that far from Caribee when the water subsided.

I think we were in shock from mental trauma and I know we were exhausted from too many nights with little or no sleep. We were standing in the road with our outboard and our buckets, staring through the bushes at the water blocking our path and rambling about our plight when a young Bahamian couple we had never seen before took pity on us, offering us their spare bedroom for the night. It was the first of what would be many acts of kindness by the Bahamian people in the coming days. The islanders of Eleuthera, who had lost so much themselves, always did whatever they could and shared whatever they had with us and the other stranded cruisers in Alice Town.

So it was that we spent the night in the home of Ricardo Campbell and slept in a dry bed in a house with a roof (their house stood at the bottom of a small valley that was sheltered from the worst of the wind), the closest house to Caribee that was still standing. We fell onto the bed drained and weary and fell asleep right away. I had a fitful night of vivid, disjointed dreams, trying to sleep lightly enough to wake before dawn so that we might be the first to reach whatever was left of our home.





◆◆◆



A rooster’s crow broke into my dream. I snapped awake in the darkness and felt for Cheryl, then sat up and shook her awake.

“We have to go, wake up,” I said.

“What time is it? It’s still dark.”

“It won’t be for long, the roosters are crowing.” I wondered how there could be chickens that hadn’t blown away. A slight lightening was already detectable outside the window, vague forms splayed across the yard. I went out into the hallway and tapped on the bedroom door of our hosts. They returned a muffled acknowledgement of my thanks for their hospitality along with a wish for good luck. We collected our belongings and headed off toward Caribee in the gathering light.

We crossed the strip of tar-sealed road and picked our way through the soggy scrub that had been inundated the night before. The bushes were spackled with plastic bags and clumps of trash, and the smell of low tide hung in the cool stillness. Dead fish were everywhere; angelfish, butterfly fish, puffers, grunt, grouper and goatfish. And jellyfish. Dead jellyfish blanketed the ground from the water’s edge into the brush for as far as we could see. Could the bay have really harbored that many jellyfish?

We spotted Caribee from a hundred yards away. We knew it was our boat even though we could only see her bottom from this angle. My eyes were glued to her hull as we advanced over the scattered jumble of jagged limestone rocks draped with slippery jellyfish carcasses. I felt a stirring of hope as we inched closer and I got a better look. She looked good in the dawn light considering the damage we’d seen at the south end of the bay yesterday, with one exception—the bottom was splotched with sections of missing paint, as if it had been sandblasted away. Otherwise, she looked undamaged from here, but it was her starboard side that was lying against the rocks and I dreaded what we might find there. If she were holed, that’s where the hole would be found.

She was a long way from the bay, at least two boat-lengths uphill from the water’s edge, more evidence of the massive surge that had flooded through the cut. I saw that the bottom quarter of the rudder was missing, ending in a jagged rip of fiberglass hanging uselessly in the air. The bronze rudder shoe that had secured the bottom end of the rudder to the keel was missing too. Not good, but easy enough to jury-rig in a proper boatyard. Of course we were far from a boatyard, proper or otherwise. I peeked around the stern to the other side, the side supporting the weight of the boat. I couldn’t see much of the starboard hull, because there was a tangle of the scraggly brush sandwiched between the hull and the rocks. That was good, maybe. Could it be that the padding of those bushes had protected her?





“Look, she’s not touching the rocks,” Cheryl said from behind me.

“I don’t know, maybe not. I can’t see anything for the limbs. We’ll have to check from the inside.”

“The rigging looks okay, doesn’t it?”

I looked up at the mast, spreaders and rigging wire. It did look okay, but as I scanned the mast I noticed that sections of the gold anodizing had been worn away from the front of the mast in the same way that the bottom paint had been blasted off. I could understand how the relatively soft bottom paint could have been lost, but it was hard to imagine wind having the power to cut anodizing from aluminum.

It was clear what had dragged us ashore. A Bahamian fishing trawler rested on the rocks a few boat-lengths inland from Caribee, her homemade rebar excuse-for-an-anchor snagged on one of our nylon anchor rodes, stretching it tight from the bow. The stark evidence was irrefutable in the harsh light of the rising sun. Our other two rodes still led from the bow out into the harbor. The chain rode drooped with slack, but the three-strand nylon one was bar-taught against the anchor that was still dug into the muddy bottom. That anchor alone might have been enough to hold us, but there was no way that it could have held two boats.

We climbed over the starboard caprail and lifelines and into the sharply tilted cockpit. It was a relief to see the companionway lock still in place and snapped shut. I unlocked it, slid the hatch open, lifted out the drop boards and peered apprehensively into the cabin. Books, packages of food and settee cushions were piled against the starboard hull, but at first glance things didn’t look that bad. At least there was no standing water. We climbed down for a closer look, supporting our weight on the side of the cabinetry and hull. Right away we could tell there was a huge mess caused by the oily bilge water that had sloshed everywhere. It was mostly my fault. In a misguided effort to reduce the hull’s windage I had partially flooded the deep bilge sump with seawater, hoping to lower the boat deeper into the water and reduce her exposure to the wind. Stupid mistake. It probably hadn’t even lowered the hull an inch deeper, but when the motion got violent the water escaped the bilge and ricocheted around inside the cabin, soaking everything with nasty saltwater. It would take a hell of a clean-up effort, but if that was the worst of it we could handle it.

We opened the starboard locker doors and pulled everything out, trying to see from the inside the part of the hull the vegetation was hiding from view on the outside. We were looking for holes. We didn’t find any or see any light coming in from the outside, but it was impossible to be sure. There could be damage concealed behind the installed water and fuel tanks inside the bilge cavity. We were clearly lucky in a relative sense; the bay’s shoreline was littered with sunken and crushed boats. We poked and prodded and looked around for damage and were mostly relieved with what we found, but as the morning wore on reality started to intrude and we got more depressed and confused about what to do next. Much of the large stock of provisions we’d loaded aboard in Florida was ruined. The canned goods were okay for now, but many of the labels were missing and they would start to rust soon. We didn’t have enough fresh water to properly rinse them. We wouldn’t even have enough water to drink within a few days, and I doubted that there would be any potable water available in town anytime soon. Virtually all of our dry staples—rice, flour, cereals, pasta, beans, grains and such—were garbage. Dozens of eggs were crushed into a gooey mess on the cabin sole. The upholstery was splattered with oily saltwater. The same water had coated some of our clean clothes.

The boat was high and dry with a damaged rudder that we had no way to repair, and there was no telling when or how we would ever re-float her even if we could fix the rudder. Without seawater for cooling we couldn’t run the engine to charge the batteries, so we’d have to rely on our small solar panel array for power. We were a half-mile across a rough stretch of ground from the only road leading into what was left of town. Leaving the boat unattended was out of the question with looters (sorry, I mean wreckers) running wild and on the lookout for new targets. It seemed that we would have to live here in these conditions for the duration, whatever that meant.

We got bits of news that day from the few shipwrecked sailors who walked along the water’s edge or patrolled the shoreline in dinghies searching for lost boat gear. One of the things we learned was that there was no way to communicate with the outside world. Batelco’s whole system had gone down, so no phone calls could go out. There was no way that our families could know if we were alive or dead.

In the late afternoon I hitched a dinghy ride across the oil-covered bay to retrieve Stubby and bring her to Caribee’s resting place. We lifted her onto the rocky shore and secured her for future use.

Our first night on the rocks was nerve wracking. Caribee’s hull was a beacon to wreckers, visible from the whole town and the surrounding hillsides. We had no problem that day because everybody could see that we were onboard, but would they know we were spending the night? I didn’t relish the thought of surprising any midnight intruders. I slept lightly, the cold steel of my machete pressed against my leg. Cracking noises that I imagined to be breaking twigs drifted in from the blackened void throughout the night. I set an alarm to rouse me from my sleeping spot against the side of the hull every hour. When it sounded I would get up and shine a powerful Q-beam spotlight around in all directions and shout, “Who’s there?” I never knew if anybody was really lurking in the darkness, but heard that several unoccupied boats nearby had repeated nocturnal visits from looters. I kept the routine each night, catching up on sleep during the daytime, when I could. Cheryl took her turns standing “wrecker watch” too, and neither of us got enough sleep. At least mosquitoes didn’t bother us. The only benefit of the hurricane may have been that it blew all the mosquitoes away.

We quickly learned the limitations of our ability to clean up and fix the boat while she was still lying on the rocks. Most of our cleaning had to be done with buckets of harbor water that still had the sheen of diesel fuel on its surface. Our saltwater-washed clothes never fully dried and clung to our skin in the stifling heat, making rashes an ever-present threat. We worked together on many chores, but Cheryl concentrated on the domestic cleanup tasks while I retrieved anchors and searched the bay for the missing bronze rudder shoe. In an amazing stroke of luck I spotted a tiny corner of the shoe poking out of the muddy bottom and pulled it free.

There were a lot of limitations on how we lived there in the rocks. We were able to cook what food we had left only by hand-holding the pans over the canted burners of the propane stove while cooking. It was a gimbaled stove, but wouldn’t tilt quite as far as the boat was now heeled. The first morning chore following each sleep-deprived night was making coffee and breakfast before the sun started heating up the cabin. By the time we had eaten and cleaned up we were already tired, and the day’s work hadn’t even started. It got hot on the rock pile during the cloudless, windless days that followed in the wake of Andrew’s rampage. The only place where the temperature was bearable was in a hollowed-out cavity that we made between the rocks in the shade of the hull. It was only shaded in the afternoon. That’s when we would pull the cockpit cushions under the hull and lie in the shade like dogs wallowing into the cool dirt under an old front porch in summertime.

One afternoon I was looking out over the water from that crude shelter, sweat dripping from my chin, a salty T-shirt stuck to my back and the cloying rot of dead fish choking the air, watching the only three anchored sailboats that hadn’t been driven ashore in the storm. The tinkling of voices carried softly on the languid breeze. The bastards were actually happy! Well, why not? They could just weigh anchor and sail away whenever they pleased, something we had taken for granted a few days earlier. I still remember wishing that we could trade places and just sail away while they were left up here in the hot, stinking rocks. It wasn’t a charitable thought and I quickly let it go. I’m not proud of thinking it, but there it was.

The second day that we spent on the rocks was the first day that a small band of giggling children stopped for a visit. They noticed us lying in the hull’s shade as they crept along on the wet limestone dogtooth, popping curbs—the local name for chitons, prehistoric looking grub-like creatures that suction to stones in the surf—off the rocks with a butter knife and eating them raw on the spot. They pronounced the name with two syllables, cur-ubs, and said they were delicious. We sautéed some of them in garlic butter and while Cheryl pronounced them “tolerable”, they tasted the way low tide smells to me and were a long way from delicious.

Our fourth day on the rocks was my birthday. Not exactly how I had hoped to spend it, but there was nothing for it. Still, we wanted to do something a little special if only to take our minds off of what was already starting to feel like an ordeal without end. We decided to go into town for a few beers. We’d heard that somebody had dragged a gasoline generator up to the remains of the Forget-Me-Not and powered up a cooler full of Kalik and Becks. The whole town was without electricity, but this roofless bar was serving cold beer. You have to set your priorities I guess.

Some cruisers we’d met, a couple from one of the still-floating boats that had been the objects of my earlier envy, kindly agreed to stay at our boat for a few hours of wrecker watch while we had our modest fling. We lifted Stubby into the bay, clamped the little Suzuki to her transom and motored toward the wreckage of Alice Town—our first outing since we’d walked up to Caribee the morning after the storm.





There was a military-gray steel gunboat flying a Jamaican flag tied up to the town quay. We pulled Stubby into the shade of her bow and dragged ourselves up the face of the concrete. Wrecked sailboats were lying around on the top of the quay and piled in a jumble against the shore beyond it. Black-skinned uniformed soldiers milled about the gunboat and headed up toward town in small groups. Chainsaws buzzed on the hill up in town. As we walked toward the bar we passed Jamaican soldiers and local residents cleaning away debris and chopping up downed trees. It looked like the Jamaicans were doing most of the work and the Bahamians most of the watching.

The drone of the bar’s four-stroke Honda generator hummed steady and soothing against the distant backdrop of hyperactive chainsaw motors. We walked into the barroom through an open doorway that was missing its door. It was shaded inside but not really dark because of light coming through the gaping hole where half the roof had been. A dozen Bahamian men sat on barstools or at tables in a back corner. A few of them nodded when we walked in, but otherwise they scarcely spared a glance for the white couple. The man behind the bar walked down to meet us.

“I hear you’ve got some cold beer here,” I said.

“Ah course we do; what kind ah bar you think we running here we don’t got no cold beer,” he said, a broad grin spreading on his face.

“Let us have a couple of Becks, please.”

“Two Becks?”

“Two Becks. This is my birthday and we’re just glad to find somebody with cold beer after the storm.”

“Ah course there’s no current to run the cooler, so I had to get a generator from my cousin down Governor’s way. But we’ll have cold beer ‘til the gas runs out. Unless the beer runs out first,” he cackled. “Happy birthday, even if you do have problems. I know you’re off a yacht ‘cause I can see you ain’t tourists.”

“Yeah, our boat is on the rocks up on the north end of the bay. But she’s not too bad. If we can do a little repair and get her floated somehow we think she’ll be okay. Don’t know how we’re gonna do it yet, but we will.”

“Hell of a storm, worst I ever seen,” he said. “Worst I ever heard of, even. Andrew was a bad boy, but thank God it wadn’t no worse.”

​The town was half destroyed. There was no power, phone service, water or reliable food supply. Almost every boat in the harbor had been driven ashore, including several local boats. I wondered how he thought it could have been worse. I guess they could have been without beer? He went on to explain that his brother had lost his house and a cousin had lost her house, but only four people in the whole country had been killed, they said. I realized that he was right; a lot of people could very easily have been killed, and that really would have been a lot worse. There’s always a bright side if you look hard enough.

We spent a couple of hours relaxing and talking with the guys in the bar, all very friendly and cheerful in the face of a lot of adversity. That put us both in a better mood, or maybe it was the beer. When we started to feel guilty about leaving our friends on the hot, smelly rocks watching our boat we headed back home, such as it was, and fell back into our gloomy routine.

The next day John and Joyce came by in their dinghy. They got out and walked around our boat, taking special notice of our shady cave under the keel. John shook his head and smiled sadly.

“I know you guys are new to this,” he said, “and I was just wondering, how do you like cruising so far?”

“I hope this isn’t the good part,” Cheryl said.

“It’s not so bad once you get used to it,” I said. Cheryl gave me the side eye and John and Joyce both laughed.

“Listen,” John said, “The reason we came by, I remember you said that you have coverage with the Lawrence Group through SSCA, like we do. I’m going to see if I can reach them on SSB and I wondered if you might want to talk to them about your boat, if I get through?”

“Absolutely, we’re ready to get off of these rocks, even as much fun as it is.”

Single sideband radio was an exotic piece of equipment to us and beyond our budget. I was happy to take advantage of John’s offer. I rode with them until we reached the shoreline area closest to Mystique, which was lying at least two hundred yards from the water across very gradually sloping ground. She was sitting more upright than Caribee owing to her shallower draft and more flat bottom sections. We walked to her and climbed aboard.

After a frustrating half-hour of radio work John was finally able to raise the marine operator on station Whiskey Lima Oscar (WLO) in Mobile, Alabama and get his call through to the insurance agency. In a nutshell, their response was that they had a tremendous amount of damage to insured boats in south Florida that they were working through, and would get to the Bahamas “in due course”. No, she could not be more specific. No, she was the highest-ranking supervisor available. Yes, we were definitely on their list now.

We decided that it didn’t sound good. John was of the opinion that they might very well declare bankruptcy and leave us on our own. I hoped he was wrong. We had debated whether to buy insurance before leaving Florida and had almost decided to self-insure when we heard about a discount policy that was being offered to members of the Seven Seas Cruising Association. We joined SSCA and within days had also joined the ranks of the insured, at an unbelievably low annual premium that was approximately one percent of the insured value. That might not seem so great for a house, but in the yacht insurance industry it was a screaming bargain. Now we were wondering if the premium might have been low for a good reason.

Life on the rocks dragged on while we waited for some response from our insurance company. We didn’t know if we would have to wait a week, a month or maybe forever. The fish rot was fading away and the mosquitoes still had not returned, so I figured that counted as an improvement in living conditions. The wreckers seemed to have learned that this boat was always occupied. We had almost reached the limit of constructive boat work and cleanup that could be done under the current conditions so spent less time working and more time sheltering in the keel-cave and reading paperbacks.

The owner of the workboat that had dragged us ashore, a man from Governor’s Harbor named Vernon, came by to check on his boat. Vernon turned out to be a very nice man. He apologized for pulling us onto the rocks with an offering of ice that he’d carried north from down where the electricity still flowed. We poured cans of hot Coke over glasses filled with ice cubes, savoring the hissing of carbonated bubbles and the cracking of the cubes. The simple pleasure of sipping those ice-cold drinks on a scorching hot day felt like the greatest luxury in the world.

The Bahamian kids stopped for a visit every day. They brought us bottles of drinking water to stretch our dwindling supply. We asked them questions about their island and they asked us about America, which they visualized as a wonderland of all-white millionaires, even before the days when satellite communications would infect the world with our televised fantasies. We taught them the Jimmy Johnson ditty and they sang it with enthusiasm in unison whenever and wherever we saw them for the rest of our time in Hatchet Bay. They must have been evangelical about it too, because we heard completely different groups of kids singing it later.





My name is Jimmy Johnson

I live in Wisconsin

I work in a lumberyard there

The people I meet

When I go down the street

Say, “Hello there, what’s your name?”

My name is Jimmy Johnson...

And on and on it goes, for as long as you care to sing it. I think I learned it from my grandmother as a child, but I really don’t remember anymore. After that I was Jimmy to the island children, and whenever they saw me they would call out, “Jimmy Johnson!” and burst into song. Maybe there’s a generation of children growing up in Hatchet Bay today singing the Jimmy Johnson song that their parents taught them.





◆◆◆



Early Sunday morning, a week after Andrew struck the island, the sun streamed in through the hatch and lit my eyelids, wrenching me from sleep in a sheet of orange light. I knew it was time to wake up yet again and start the coffee before it got too hot inside. Before I could stir, somebody outside started pounding the hull. Who could that be this early? Cheryl was sitting up, looking around and rubbing her eyes. The knocking came again, louder this time, but nobody said anything outside.

“I hope it’s not looters checking to see if somebody’s here,” I said. I found the handle of the machete and stood up. “Just a minute, we’re here,” I shouted.

I propped open the hatch of the forward cabin and stuck my head out. I saw two middle aged white guys wearing wide-brimmed hats and sunglasses. They looked too manicured to be cruisers. We looked at each other for a few beats before anyone spoke.

“Are you ready to be lifted off the rocks?” the taller one asked.

I looked at them, trying to decide if it was a rhetorical question. Finally I asked, “Now, who are you?”

“Marcus Mitchell,” he said, “from Sampson Cay resort, down in the Exumas. I run a salvage operation, too.”

I explained that I hadn’t heard from my insurance company but we did have coverage. He then introduced the guy with him as a marine surveyor that the Lawrence Group had hired as an adjuster for Hurricane Andrew damage claims in the Bahamas. He said everything was already taken care of, a settlement had been made and he would be back later with a crane to lift us off. He asked a few questions about our displacement and draft and whether we had any holes, then took a quick walk around the hull.

I looked at Cheryl and saw tears in her eyes. “What’s wrong?”

“Nothing,” she said, smiling. “I didn’t know how long we’d have to stay here and now it’s like the cavalry has arrived to save us. I’m so tired of being stinky and hot and not being able to clean up right.”

I turned back to ask Marcus if he had any way to repair our rudder, but they had both walked back to the water and climbed into a Boston Whaler skiff. He pulled the starter cord of the outboard and they roared away, leaving us standing in silence, staring at their wake. When they were out of sight it was as if we had imagined the whole thing and they hadn’t been there at all.





◆◆◆



A large steel workboat, the M/V Sampson, with a barge lashed to its side slowly approached the shoreline in front of us. The barge had an old crane parked on its deck. Marcus came ashore with a crew of guys who pulled some wide nylon straps under Caribee’s hull and attached them to a spreader bar. He went back to the boat and pushed the barge almost to the shore. Soon Caribee was swinging in the air, first above the rocks and then out over the water. I got my first look at the area of the hull that had been obscured by rocks and brush and couldn’t see any serious damage, just some scarring and abrasion below the waterline. She was still heeled hard to starboard, but when they dipped her into the water and let her float freely in the straps she immediately righted to level. I rushed out in the dinghy and climbed onboard to look for any water coming in. She was dry; there were no holes in the hull. They lifted her back up and onto the barge and headed across the bay. Marcus explained that he would set us up on the quay so that we could make repairs to the rudder and do any other work that might be needed. He expected to have his crane in the harbor for four more days, and then he would have to leave to go salvage several boats up at Royal Island. If we got her ready quickly he could launch her before he left, otherwise he hoped to be back within a couple of weeks. We knew what that meant in island time—no way would he be back in two weeks. Two months, maybe.





On the southeast side of the bay the crane operator lifted Caribee onto the quay and the crew set to work chain-sawing broken power poles and palm trunks into short posts and propping up her hull with them. They cut wedges and beat them into place with sledgehammers, tightening the makeshift jackstands. They fashioned a boarding ladder from scrap lumber and bid us farewell, leaving us to complete our repairs as best we could.

Surveying our new situation did not inspire confidence. I could probably just kick out a couple of the supporting posts and the boat would crash to the concrete surface of the quay. Her deep keel meant that she would have a long way to fall and would no doubt be destroyed. I didn’t even want to think about being inside if it happened. If that weren’t enough, we were only about five feet from the edge of the quay, so if she fell toward her port side she would almost surely continue on over the edge and into the water six feet below, probably landing completely upside down. We resolved to do whatever it took to get her ready to launch before Marcus left the bay, even if it meant that we couldn’t do a complete repair. Anything was better than spending weeks on this quay.





The next few days were a blur of activity. We worked day and night, and even though we were already in a state of near exhaustion, there was little opportunity for sleep or rest. The electricity was still out but we found a generator on a boat that had been destroyed, but not sunk, and used it to power our grinder, saws and some incandescent lights that we scavenged. We finished grinding away the rough edges of the damaged fiberglass late that first night but didn’t have enough glass fabric or epoxy resin in our stores for a repair of this size. We would have to start searching for boat building materials first thing in the morning.

We fell into our bunks after midnight and soon discovered another problem with our location. My head had barely touched the pillow when I awoke to shouts and car horns that sounded loud enough to actually be inside the boat. A powerful diesel engine rumbled nearby. What was going on? I climbed into the cockpit and looked down on a scene of pandemonium. A rapidly swelling crowd was illuminated in the headlights of several pickup trucks that pressed toward the end of the quay where a large powerboat was docking. Somebody on the boat’s bridge swung a brilliant spotlight across the wharf, revealing an energetic swarm of islanders competing for position. I climbed down the ladder to find out what the hell.

“Mailboat’s in from Florida,” a man said in answer to my query. “They got plywood and roofing and all kind of stuff, and everybody wants to make sure they get theirs. Might not get anymore. South Florida got wiped out like we did.”

The shouting crowd pressed closer to the mailboat. Two uniformed Customs officials with flashlights and clipboards stood by to clear the boat into this provisional port of entry. Trucks turned and backed through the crowd in the dark, coming dangerously close to the poles supporting our boat. I had no choice but to stay down there and make sure that we didn’t get knocked over. Knocking us over seemed to be the last thing on anyone’s mind, but they might have felt differently if seven tons of boat had come crashing down on their heads. I had never felt so tired and must have been running on pure adrenalin. It was more than three hours before the mailboat finally pulled away and the last of the loaded trucks’ red taillights faded into the distance, leaving us once again in absolute darkness. I dragged myself back up the ladder and into the bunk, but the sun’s rays soon streamed through the open hatch and hit me square in the face, announcing the start of a new day. It promised to be another long one.

We started rummaging around and asking where we might find some fiberglass and resin. The name “Toad” kept popping up.

“Toad builds a few surfboards. I bet he has some cloth and resin,” one man said.

“Toad? Like a frog?”

“That’s what they call him, I don’t know why. It’s a nickname, you know? He’s a surfer, shaggy blond hair, sun-streaked looking. You’ll know if you see him. Just ask around, he’s on the island. I saw him yesterday.”

We went off in search of Toad, spreading the message for him to contact us. He proved not to be too elusive. I saw a guy walking toward the boat later that morning and knew it had to be him.

“You the people looking for me?” he asked, eyeing Caribee and the improbable way she was supported on rough-cut posts.

“Toad, right?”

“Yeah, you got a problem with it?” He sounded irritated.

“No, I just... I figured you might be the guy.”

“Just kidding,” he grinned. “I like to mess with people about my name. Most people think it’s a nickname.”

“It’s not?”

“I’d rather not say.” He grinned again.

Toad told us that he thought he had some resin but it was polyester, not epoxy, and it was a few years old. It might have solidified by now. Maybe he even had some hardener to go with it, if he could find it. He also thought he could round up some glass cloth or matting or something we could stick in the hole. He didn’t think the cloth had gotten too wet, maybe. He went off to hitch a ride to his pad and showed up a few hours later with a wad of fiberglass matting, a can of expanding foam and a five-gallon jug that had three gallons of polyester resin left in it. None of these materials were ideal for the repairs we had planned, but beggars can’t be choosers. We enticed Toad to help with the work by promising him a piece of our expected insurance settlement.

First, we formed the rough shape of the missing part of the rudder with foam and then sculpted it with a sanding pad fitted to our four-inch Makita grinder. When it was time to lay resin-impregnated cloth over the foam we discovered that the old resin contained a lot of hardened clumps, some as big as golf balls. We ended up straining them out by pouring the resin through a screen door that we found lying by the side of the road. We salvaged two gallons of usable resin, more than enough.

We built up layers of fiberglass, grinding away the excess and smoothing it between coats, gradually reforming the rudder to something close to its original shape. We filled and smoothed the gouges in the hull while waiting for the resin on the rudder to cure. I used my epoxy resin stores for the hull work because I figured it would be a more-or-less permanent repair. The glasswork was going well but we were going to need some metal parts for the rudder’s heel attachment. There was no chance of having anything fabricated on the island, but I had an idea.

For the past two days a US Navy landing craft had been coming into the harbor and docking at the quay near us, carrying seamen who were helping with the relief effort. I knew that they went out to rendezvous with a bigger ship each night, and figured that at least one of the vessels must have a machine shop onboard. I talked to the engineer of the landing craft and he looked at my rudder, took some measurements, and very kindly agreed to fabricate a steel gudgeon to replace the missing socket. The next morning I had the part in my hand, and after a small amount of grinding and filling, it fit. Things were looking up.

The nights were not getting any less hectic—if anything they were worse. One night two separate boatloads of supplies arrived, and the buzz of activity went on almost until dawn. I once had to scream “Stop!” as loud as I could to get the attention of a truck driver and keep him from backing into one of the posts holding us up. When he finally stopped he was less than a foot from one of the main supports. I didn’t know how much more of this I could take. It was wearing on Cheryl too, but I thought she was holding up better than I was. Only the promise of a quick launch made it all bearable.

The big day finally came. The previous evening a friend of Toad’s had delivered four quarts of bottom paint bought at a hardware store down at Governor’s Harbor. It was all they had, and we believed they were the last four quarts on the whole island, which was not far-fetched considering that there wasn’t a boatyard on Eleuthera. We applied a well-thinned coat that night by the light of our generator-powered floodlights and a second, even thinner coat the next morning. It wasn’t nearly enough for a proper anti-fouling job, but it would have to do. Marcus arrived with his crane and splashed us before noon amid a fair amount of ceremony from a small band of battered cruisers and attending locals. We were the first cruising boat to be re-floated and thus a symbol of hope for those who still had hopes of their own.

We slept peacefully that night, rocked by the gentle motion of a floating boat for the first time in a dozen nights. Not even the arriving mailboat stirred us. There were still several days of work ahead, but it was like a vacation compared to what we’d been through. There was no longer any pressure; we could take our time with the cleanup and preparations for sailing away. That was the crux of our newfound cheer; we would be sailing away soon, not too much the worse for wear after all.

The water and electricity were flowing again, and we could get phone calls out to our families and friends. We even had time to help others who had not been as lucky as we had. It was a sign of just how much our spirits had lifted that we now thought of ourselves as the lucky ones.

I think it was a few years before we really appreciated the lessons that Andrew taught us. The storm was our trial-by-fire and we survived it to become stronger, more capable, more confident cruisers. It was the beginning of our transition from novices to real cruising sailors. Andrew taught us about improvisation and creatively coping with adversity. These skills would serve us well in the coming years, because as we were just beginning to learn, cruising is not only about the adventure of sailing the high seas to exotic ports of call. Sometimes it’s really hard, and scary. Sometimes it’s about a nitty-gritty, close-to-the-bone slice of life that may not be pretty or fun or easy, but it’s very real. And that’s not always such a bad thing.





Escape Artists





People sometimes ask me how we became cruising sailors in the first place. It’s not exactly a typical path for a couple from a small town in the middle of a landlocked state, so I understand the question. I think that people who grow up a long way from the ocean are sometimes more fascinated by it because of that—the distance from the sea and the allure of the unknown. The sense of wonder at the fact that you could simply head away from shore in a boat and, if you just kept on going long enough, fetch up in some far flung corner of the world. The thought of that was always magical to me. It was never anything that I seriously considered, until I did, but I remember daydreaming about it as far back as our first family trips to the coast when I was just a kid. What was on the other side of all that water, and why couldn’t you just cross over it in a boat and find out?

If there was a single moment that eventually tipped the balance and planted the idea in my head that this was really something Cheryl and I might do, it was probably a thing I happened to see one day while on vacation in Mexico. It was nothing really, the kind of scene you might expect to see at a coastal resort town, but I saw it at the right time for the mood I was in and it stuck with me. This was in the eighties and we were taking dive trips once a year or so. We’d just gotten certified and were still very excited about scuba diving. We were young and it was a brand new adventure. It was the last day of our trip to Cozumel and we were really dreading having to leave, not just because we had to return to work but also because winter was coming on soon and we knew it would be quite a while before we would feel warm sunshine on our skin again, much less see palm trees, beaches and coral reefs. We pushed our toes into the white powder sand at a funky little beachfront bar, sipped icy Coronas and tried to make the most of the short time we had left in paradise. A warm breeze drifted over the beach from the blue Caribbean and ruffled my hair. From behind my sunglasses I idly watched a sailboat that was anchored just off the beach, a ketch about forty feet long, only I didn’t know it was a ketch because I didn’t know about rigs then. The two young couples onboard had led the anchor rode to the stern and hoisted a spinnaker in the gentle breeze. They used the spinnaker like a tire swing, taking turns hanging onto the cinched-up sheets (or maybe they had a boatswain’s seat fixed to the sheets) and letting the spinnaker billow out and blow them up over the water in front of the bow. Sometimes they would turn loose and fall into the water and swim back to the boat. Wavelets shimmered in the afternoon sun, the girls giggled, and you could just tell they were all having a blast, not a care in the world. It made me think of that Jimmy Buffet song, “Nautical Wheelers”. I remembered seeing the boat anchored there when we first arrived on the island a week before and it didn’t look like they were about to leave anytime soon. We had to go home tomorrow, but they didn’t, or so it seemed to me. One of the couples had what looked like permanent tans and acted like they were home. It looked like they might be living a lifestyle rather than taking a vacation. This made a bigger impression on me than it might otherwise have because I had been privately fantasizing all week about ways we might save up enough money to come live on Cozumel for the winter months and just dive and live the good life, maybe stay in one of the little posadas in town, get the monthly rate. Maybe even figure out some way to earn some money here. This was before Cozumel got all touristy, when it was still something like a laid-back fishing village and dirt-cheap. I hadn’t run this idea by Cheryl. Maybe I had mentioned a little something about it in passing, but it was essentially a private fantasy at that point.

So I decided that day to look into the idea of living on a sailboat and just traveling around, living large. That’s how I thought of it. Living the free and easy life, no worries. We could go where we pleased when we pleased. Of course when we got back home and into work mode and consumer mode daily life intervened, like it does, and I never thought much about it again except on melancholic days when I was especially sick of work or tired of cold, dreary weather. On those days I would fantasize about the Big Escape, down to the banana republics and the tropical sunshine.

A few years later we were out for a Sunday drive on Highway 10 outside of Little Rock and there was a sailboat on a trailer by the side of the road with a For Sale sign on it. We looked it over from the outside and I wrote down the phone number. Cheryl said it looked like a neat boat that would be fun to camp in. I called the next day and, long story short, in two weeks we became the proud owners of an Aquarius 23 swing-keel sloop, with trailer.

Our first sailing adventure was a condensed version of the fantasy I’d first entertained that day back in Mexico. We took off work for six weeks starting in April and pulled our little boat, which we had named Amuck (as in to run amuck), to the Florida Keys. We’d spent much of the year leading up to the trip refurbishing and upgrading her for extending gunkhole style cruising. We’d also been sailing her on Greers Ferry Lake near our home most every free weekend, as a shakedown cruise before the Keys trip. We were teaching ourselves to sail, too. We read books on sailing and navigation and bought a BBA Chartkit with all the charts of the Keys included. We spent long hours mapping out different potential routes through the islands. I was happy to see that Cheryl was as excited about the trip as I was.

We launched Amuck at the public ramp in Key Largo and left the truck and boat trailer with our old scuba instructor who now had a house there. After a few days in the Largo area we headed toward Key West on the inside, the Florida Bay side, meandering along, sampling anchorages and meeting a few people along the way. We would periodically pass under a bridge and sail out to explore the reef on the ocean side of the islands. We were having the time of our lives and after several years with only occasional weeklong breaks from work, six weeks seemed like a glorious mountain of free time.

One of the places we stopped along the way was Boot Key Harbor, in Marathon. We had to call on the VHF to have the bridge tender open the bridge for us so we could enter the harbor, another first for us. We motored through the bridge channel (we had outfitted Amuck with a five-horsepower Honda outboard) and were greeted by a veritable forest of masts. The virtually landlocked harbor must have held more than a hundred anchored boats, mostly sailboats of one type or another, and most of them seemed to have people living aboard. This looked like it was going to be an interesting place. We anchored in an open space toward the eastern end of the harbor and flagged some people in a passing dinghy, asking for local information. We learned that the place to access shore was a bar and dinghy dock called Dockside Lounge, which catered to cruisers and liveaboards, and where you could not only dock your dinghy and buy a drink but take a hot shower, park a bicycle (or a car), take on water, drop off garbage and even receive mail and phone messages. This was years before mobile phones of course. Dockside, we were told, was a funky open-air joint on the waterfront and was the center of an active social scene, a watering hole for sailors, a place to meet and hang out with like-minded people who were living the life we were only sampling.

When we pulled Stubby up to the dock we found ourselves at the edge of a raft of dinghies and tenders of all descriptions, from the most basic and roughly constructed plywood boxes to inflatable Avons, Zodiacs and Caribes. Space was so tight we had to climb into and walk through somebody’s inflatable just to reach the dock. We were instantly pegged as newcomers by a couple of scruffy-looking characters sitting at a weathered wooden picnic table and sucking on cans of Old Milwaukee that they pulled from the rings of a plastic six-pack holder. They started a friendly conversation and soon more people ambled up and joined in. Within minutes we’d made some new friends. This was our first real contact with a cruising community and I remember thinking how remarkably helpful and open everybody was, especially when they learned we were new to sailing and the concept of cruising. I think we had expected experienced sailors to be somewhat condescending to novices like us, but exactly the opposite was the case. Everybody went out of their way to make us feel welcome and a part of the group. They were inclusive and almost evangelical about the lifestyle. What we now know but didn’t really understand then is that this kind of camaraderie is not unusual, but is in fact the norm among cruising sailors the world over. It’s one of the things that first attracted us to the lifestyle and still does. Cruising means constantly meeting new people who share your interests and concerns but often have completely different backgrounds, nationalities and even languages.

We became fast friends with several of the sailors at Dockside and were invited to a couple of onboard parties in the harbor where we met others. Most of them were local sailors dreaming of more ambitious travels, but a few were serious long-distance cruisers—ocean voyagers and circumnavigators of the world, sea nomads who had been underway for years, some of them. These were the people we wanted to talk to, to ask what it was really all about, to figure out if this might be something we could possibly do, or would even want to. They assured us that it was, on both counts. They spun tales of high adventure in faraway lands that reinforced every positive impression I ever had about long distance cruising. They made it all sound so romantic. The offhand way they spoke of their adventures was seductive, enthralling. It made our regular lives sound so mundane in comparison. But the kicker was when they easily dismissed my biggest concern about our being able to pull off the Big Escape as something not even worth spending any time thinking about.

“It costs a lot less to go cruising than to live ashore, that’s for sure,” one long-time cruiser told us. “Think about it. Once you have a boat in good shape and well equipped, you won’t have that many expenses. Think of the money you won’t be spending anymore. You won’t have utility bills or car expenses, rent or house payments. No real taxes, except sales tax. You won’t have to dress to impress anyone so won’t need many clothes, especially in the tropics. You can get rid of most of your insurance cost, maybe all of it if you don’t mind a little risk. Your main costs, really, will be food and drink. Well, okay, sailors do tend drink a lot, but that’s up to you, and just about everything else will cost a lot less, you’ll see.”

That sounded encouraging, but still, I knew the small nest egg we hoped to build up would run out soon enough, and mentioned my concern about that.

“Don’t worry. It’s easy to find temporary work if you have any hands-on skills at all,” was his reply. “I’ve worked all kinds of jobs in all kinds of places, and the beauty of it is, you can save most of the money you make because your expenses will be so much less. My personal rule is never to work more than one year out of every three, or that ratio, twice as much time spent cruising as working. It’s easy to do if you keep a handle on your spending.”

This was a revelation. Could it really be that easy? After others seconded that general sentiment, if not the exact ratio, I was sold. In truth, we were both so smitten by the romance of cruising under sail by this point that we probably wouldn't have been deterred if they’d assured us that we’d be utterly bankrupt in two years. So we finished up our six weeks of Keys cruising and dragged our little boat back up the hills to Arkansas. This adventure was at its end but we didn’t have the usual end-of-vacation blahs—far from it. All the way back we chattered excitedly about our BE and all the obstacles that would undoubtedly stand in our path, and of how we might maintain our resolve to make it happen. We decided not to mention it to anybody right away because we expected, shall we say, some resistance, and didn’t really want to have to deal with that for any longer than necessary. By the time we reached home we’d settled on a three-year plan. We would work steadily toward a goal of being ready to switch completely to a full time cruising lifestyle in no more than three years.

We put the plan into action as soon as we got back. Another long story short, we paid off debts, saved all we could, sold our house and most of our belongings and tied up every loose end we could think of. That was the easy part, as it turned out. Explaining this “harebrained scheme” to some of our family members was harder. For some reason, few of them considered our plan to be a splendid, well-thought-out life strategy. Luckily, almost everybody assumed it to be some sort of bizarre phase (premature mid-life crisis?) that would soon pass. They had little doubt that we would quickly see the error of our ways, come to our senses and return to where we so clearly belonged. Their certainty of this somewhat reduced the pressure we felt, but it wasn’t easy to maintain confidence and keep our own latent doubts at bay in the face of the naysaying. What if they were right? We were about to abandon a settled, middle-class lifestyle and a solid shot at the much balleyhooed American Dream for a plunge into the unknown. Were we embarking on a fool’s errand after all?

We met our schedule with a few months to spare, declaring our freedom on Martin Luther King Day, 1992. Free at last! We pulled Amuck back to the Keys, to Boot Key Harbor again, the best natural anchorage in south Florida as far as we could tell, and thus a good place to hang out while we looked for a proper cruising boat. We towed the boat behind my battered 1976 Ford F-150, its bed covered by a camper shell packed full of gear and essential belongings.

After a few months of living aboard and searching we found Caribee in Fort Lauderdale. She’s a Nicholson 32, built in England in 1968 by Camper and Nicholsons, one of the oldest builders in the world, in operation since 1782. She is a modernized traditional design consistent with the style of her era—narrow of beam with a deep draft, heavy encapsulated lead ballast, a cutaway forefoot to her full keel and a keel-hung rudder. She has a custom-built look and feel belowdecks, with lots of handcrafted teak joinery of the kind seldom seen on newer boats of her size. She came equipped with her original Volvo MD2 diesel auxiliary engine and a full compliment of sails, including two storm jibs, a storm trysail and two spinnakers. Having just returned from a passage to Europe and back, she was well proven and good-to-go for long distance cruising. We fell in love with her and have never had a reason to regret the choice.

After making some minor modifications to the boat and adding a few bits of gear we provisioned heavily at a supermarket in Marathon and made an overland run down to Big Pine Key and Key West to round out our long list. Our first cruise was going to be to the Bahamas, about which we had been hearing many glowing reports, mostly delivered from the bar at Dockside. Nobody had much bad to say about it except that the cost of almost everything would be “ungodly” and that we should load everything we thought we might possibly need onboard before leaving the States. We did. The lockers were all packed so full that the sixteen cases of beer—not so much, really, considering this was a planned four month cruise—had to be stowed under the dinette table in the salon. All in, we brought more than nine hundred dollars worth of provisions aboard, and that was in the days when you could get a lot of food and drink for that amount of money.





We were ready to go, just waiting on a weather window. One of the barstool sitters mentioned that we should maybe keep a close eye on the weather all the time once we got across the Gulf Stream, because it was, after all, hurricane season. This reminded Cheryl once again of the main concern she had about this venture. Her fretting about hurricanes had started to worry me a little too, so I asked a few of the old Bahamas veterans for their honest opinions of the danger. I was mostly told that yeah, it was a risk, but not really too much of one based on the laws of probability.

“The ocean’s big and a hurricane is small, really, especially the area of storm-force winds,” was how one of them put it. “What are the chances that you’ll get hit? And if a storm does blow up, just run to Hatchet Bay.”

The night before we jumped off for Bimini Cheryl asked me again, “Are you sure we won’t have to worry about hurricanes over there?”

“Hurricanes are usually just a few miles across and the ocean is huge,” I said. “What are the chances?”





The Curse of the Bobina





I don’t know if our outboard would have been stolen if it had been locked to the dinghy that night. They probably would have taken the dinghy, motor and all. We had, up until that afternoon, kept the outboard locked to the dinghy’s transom, but had never bothered to lock the dinghy itself to the boat. After all, nothing had been stolen from a cruising boat on the Rio Dulce for many months. I’m not sure why the thieves picked that night to start, except maybe because there was a full moon—good light for stealing.

We learned of the theft early the next morning, shortly before the rest of the cruisers on the river did. They got the news when I put it out on the daily VHF net, after I’d stepped into the cockpit and found myself staring blankly at an empty spot where the motor should have been. My theft announcement came just minutes after I’d announced the same motor for sale, an apparent source of amusement to some.

It didn’t take long to deduce who the likely culprits were; they weren’t the brightest lights in the harbor. As soon as the morning net was finished, we got a call.

“Caribee, Draker,” said a voice from the radio’s speaker.

“Draker, Caribee,” I answered into the microphone.

“You want to switch to channel seventy-two?”

“Switching.” We didn’t want to tie up the informal hailing channel, though eavesdroppers would no doubt follow us to the new frequency.

“I know who stole your motor,” said Mike, captain of the Morgan Out Island 41 usually seen anchored in the languid currents below Fronteras.

“Okay. How do you know that?” This sounded like it could be good news.

“Because they tried to steal mine, and I’m the next boat upstream from you.”

“Well, who was it?”

“That guy Erby who was cleaning my decks last week. He and three other Mayans were jerking on my steel dinghy cable, trying to cut it with a knife, I guess. The lock rattling against my stern rail woke me up.”

“And you could see that it was Erby?”

“Didn’t have to, he told me.”

“Say again?”

“When I came out into the cockpit, I guess he thought I had a gun in my hand,” Mike explained, “so he started yelling, ‘Señor Miguel, don’t shoot, it’s Erby, it’s Erby.’ I recognized his voice. He didn’t really have to tell me his name. They were pretty drunk. I thought they were going to tip their cayuco over.”

“I’d like to talk about it face to face. Is this a good time?”

“Come on over,” Mike said.

“I’ll put the other motor on and see you in a few.”

The motor I was about to attach to the dinghy was allegedly new, bought the previous day from Señor Jeff, one of several resident expatriates, this one British, who call themselves “river livers”, a reference both to their habitat and the state of their primary metabolic organ. The provenance of the machine was murky, and it was offered without warranty or paperwork (and without a discount), but in remote outposts you take what you can get. It had been locked to Caribee’s stern rail that night with the lock normally reserved for securing the now-missing motor to the dinghy. The reason we’d bought a new motor in the first place was because the old one had finally reached the point where it could no longer be reliably coaxed to life. Everything that happened after that could arguably be traced back to the failure of a simple electrical component on that now stolen motor.





◆◆◆



Our little two-horsepower Suzuki had been getting progressively more cantankerous even before we’d left the Bay Islands of Honduras almost three months earlier. It was time to invoke our friend Pete’s three-by-three outboard motor rule.

“I never fight with an outboard,” he said. “If it won’t start within three pulls for three mornings in a row I do whatever it takes to fix it. If it can’t be fixed, get a new one.”

There are few things more frustrating than jerking on a starter cord until you’re soaked in sweat while the object of your labor sullenly refuses to hit a lick. It was way past time to get serious. I tinkered with the motor for several days but could find nothing wrong. Once I’d exhausted my mechanical skills and tried out the ideas of our friends it was time to seek out a real mechanic.

We started asking around Fronteras in our halting Spanish, “¿Dónde puedo encontrar un mechánico?” Where can I find a mechanic? “Mi motor no funcionará.” My motor won’t run.

Everybody in town seemed to know a mechanic. Not only that, they knew the very best one, at the best price.

“Ve a preguntar a me primo, Felipe.” “Go see my cousin, Felipe,” said one villager, “under the bridge in Rellenos. Everybody knows he’s the best; he’ll make you a special price.”

“My brother-in-law Juan can fix any motor. He’s the best. For you, almost free. His shop is by the river in Fronteras,” another told us.

“Tomás is a Suzuki expert. He has the most modern equipment. He works only on Suzukis, and he’ll charge you nothing. Nothing. Just tell him Uncle Roberto sent you. He’s under the mango tree at the end of this path.”

Amazing. Not only did everybody know the best and cheapest mechanic, they were related to him. We went off in search of Felipe.

Stubby glided into the shade of the high arching bridge and gently bumped onto the muddy silt of the south riverbank. It felt good to be out of the sun. Rowing in the tropical sun is always a hot and sweaty business no matter how you try to pace yourself, and it’s much worse if it’s humid and there’s no wind, usually the case on Rio mornings. Yet another reason to get the outboard fixed as soon as possible. We tied the dinghy’s painter to a tree and walked away from the river, keeping to the shadows between the concrete bridge pilings. I carried the little twenty-seven-pound motor over my right shoulder. The land is low and flat on the south shore, meaning the bridge is elevated for a considerable distance. After a few minutes of walking, some rusty corrugated metal roofs came into view amid the stalks of river cane.

“I think that might be the place,” said Cheryl.

“Must be, looks like the only thing around here.”

We approached three unpainted shacks scattered randomly in the scrub. Between them lay piles of bent propellers, mud encrusted lower units, cracked Yamaha engine cowlings and corroded metal gas tanks that had once been red. A gaunt, dull-black dog slept beside a high pile of scrap metal. He raised his head to give us a quick once-over, then plopped it back into its hollowed out place in the dirt and closed his eyes. Apparently, we were unworthy of further interest. The clang of metal slamming against metal rang out from one of the shacks. I turned the corner and looked through an open entry. A short Mayan man of indeterminate age was holding a hammer and peering at a bent propeller that was clamped in his bench vice. He paused from his re-sculpting project and straightened up to appraise us.

“Buenos días, señor. ¿Está Felipe, el mecánico?”

“Buenos días. Si, soy el mecánico, Felipe.” Good morning. Yes, I am Felipe, the mechanic.

I explained our problem as best I could. He started fiddling with our motor while we awaited his diagnosis. He looked inside the integral gas tank to make sure it wasn’t empty. I guess you can never know for sure how stupid gringos are. He took the spark plug out, grounded it on the motor and pulled the starter cord smartly several times. He checked the plug’s gap. He checked the wiring. Finally, he turned to his bench, put down his screwdriver and pliers, and turned back to face us.

“La electricidad es débil. Es la bobina.” The electric spark is weak; it’s the coil.

“¿La bobina?”

“Sí, la bobina. Bobina. I must have looked as if I didn’t understand because he jabbed his finger onto the coil and practically yelled, “La BOBINA!” Que necesita una nueva bobina.” You need a new coil.

“Where could we get a new bobina?”

He shrugged. On further questioning, he allowed that maybe one of the other mechanics might have one. However, he considered them much too expensive, not like him. How long would it take to get one if we ordered it from Guatemala City? Another shrug. I translated that to mean days at least, maybe weeks. Maybe never.

We decided to go directly to Tomás, the Suzuki specialist. That was easier said than done, but he was eventually found sitting under his mango tree beside a plastic shopping bag filled with the most modern screwdrivers, pliers and adjustable wrenches. He sat on a block of wood in the midst of a pile of Yamaha carcasses. After eyeballing our motor, he told us that yes, it was true that he only worked on Suzukis. When he learned that we needed a coil, he grinned and produced a cardboard box filled with rusty Yamaha bobinas, none of which resembled ours in the slightest. Could he get one for us? He shrugged.

We made increasingly half-hearted efforts to locate a coil in the Fronteras/Rellenos area over the next few days. We even attempted to call suppliers in the city (attempted being the key word). In the end, we resigned ourselves to rowing until we reached a better-supplied port, maybe Belize City. That’s when we got word that there just might be a brand new three-horsepower Evinrude for sale by a certain Señor Jeff. We could buy a new motor and forget about bobinas. It seemed that our problems were over.





◆◆◆



Onboard Draker, Mike and I discussed the best way to deal with Erby and his cohorts. Though it was true that we’d bought the Evinrude, and that the Suzuki didn’t run at the time it was stolen, in theory it only needed a coil to be usable again. And in any case, it grated on me that we’d been robbed. I wanted these guys caught, to make an example of them if for no other reason, so it would be less likely to happen to somebody else. Mike was a retired policeman from Ohio and a river liver who’d been on the Rio long enough to get acquainted with the local police chief. He was solidly behind the idea of bringing these guys to justice. He offered to go with me to police headquarters to file a report. It would be easy to catch the thieves, he said. Just tell the police who they were and that would be it, he said. Since neither of us were fluent in Spanish, he suggested we enlist a friendly bilingual river guide he knew to tag along and translate.

Mike and I took his dingy to the public dock in Fronteras, where we met Carlos. He was waiting by the runabout that he used for his river tour business. Carlos was a clean-cut young man, gregarious and likable. He’d learned his English in California, where he’d spent a few years working as a harvester.

The three of us walked north on the right-hand side of Highway CA13, the two-lane road that crosses the bridge and doubles as Main Street in this small rough-and-tumble frontier town, the same highway that provides the only access from southeastern Guatemala into the vast and largely lawless Petén rain forest. We arrived at the police station to find the windows shuttered and the door locked. It was ten o’clock in the morning. We knocked and waited. Presently, a short, paunchy, prematurely balding man with a droopy mustache opened the door wearing only his underwear. He peered blearily out into the brilliant sunlight at the odd combination of callers who had disrupted his sleep.

“Buenos días. ¿Qué es?” Good morning. What is it? Carlos explained the situation while the policeman listened and considered the information. He held up his right index finger. “Un momento.” He withdrew back inside and closed the door.

We milled around on the sidewalk for several minutes until the metal security door was rolled up into the ceiling and the policeman stepped out in the street dressed in his uniform, holding a glass of water in his left hand and brushing his teeth with his right. He removed the toothbrush from his mouth and sent a large, soapy glob splattering onto the asphalt. He rinsed with water and spat again, then waved us inside with his toothbrush. He stuck the toothbrush into his shirt pocket, sat down behind a Formica-topped metal desk and motioned for us to pull up plastic chairs. He introduced himself as Señor Ortega, Jefe de La Policía. The Chief of Police.

He questioned me about the theft. I understood some of his questions well enough, and Carlos translated those that surpassed my skills in Spanish. The chief motioned to a young boy standing near the entrance, who scurried off to deliver a message. He rose from his chair, saying that we would all now go investigate. He didn’t question the secondhand nature of our evidence. It seemed the police were already well acquainted with Erby. A smartly uniformed, lanky officer arrived at the station and we all made our way back down the street to board Carlos’s launch.

At the dock, Carlos called me aside for a word in private before we loaded into his boat. The police chief eyed me as Carlos spoke quietly. “You know, you will have to pay for this investigation if you want it to make any progress.”

“How much?” This was not really a surprise.

“I think fifty quetzales is about right. Per day. You can try to get a better price, but for that you will get results.”

This was the equivalent of about nine dollars. Fifty quetzales for one day’s work didn’t sound like much, but it was reportedly almost a third of a week’s pay for the police chief, so he would be expected to produce.

“Okay, I can do that for a few days, but I don’t want him trying to milk it. That motor doesn’t run you know. I was planning to sell it cheap now that I have a new one. I mainly want to see the thieves stopped.” Carlos relayed this information to Señor Ortega, who nodded solemnly.

The launch came up onto a plane as Carlos swung the bow downstream and throttled up his noisy forty-horsepower Yamaha Enduro, workhorse motor of third-world fishermen everywhere. He weaved between dugout cayucos that were scattered across our path like pylons on a racecourse. Their speed was so much slower than ours that they may as well have been stopped. Five minutes later he slid the bow into a narrow gap in the thick growth overhanging the water’s edge, near the trailhead of the path leading to Erby’s home village. We climbed out over the bow and stepped down onto the soft dirt of the riverbank. Mike, Carlos and I followed the police chief and his officer down the trail. The calls of jungle birds fractured the silence and echoed through the forest.

“Policía!” cried a child’s voice from somewhere up ahead, the sound muffled, deflected by the heavy undergrowth flourishing far below the canopy of giant tropical hardwood trees. We walked for about a hundred yards before reaching the edge of the shady little village, really more of a settlement, composed of traditional thatched huts and the dirt trails that connected them. Wisps of wood smoke from cooking fires curled around the simple dwellings. Women, children and old men stepped through the open entryways of some of the huts to stare at us. No young men were in evidence. They were likely out fishing the river in their cayucos, or throwing cast-nets from the riverbank.

These were Q’eqchi’, the most common indigenous Maya people of the Guatemala/Belize region. The dour expressions on their typically smiling faces told me that they were not happy to see this group of police and gringos trooping through their village. I felt like a goon for being a part (actually the instigator) of this intrusion into the lives of these gentle people. It was the first time that I had doubts about the wisdom of trying to bring the thieves to justice.

The chief started questioning some of the old men who’d gathered around. This was not as straightforward as it might seem. Spanish is a second language to these people, and many spoke only Q’eqchi’, a language that to our ears consists mostly of clicking sounds. It sounded to me like the chief was using a combination of the two languages. The point was communicated nonetheless, and a search for the purloined Suzuki was launched. As to the whereabouts of Erby and his alleged accomplices, nobody seemed to know anything, or as Mike put it, “Nobody knows nothing, of course.” We were led into one of the huts. A tiny young woman lifted a corner of an old canvas tarp that formed part of the floor, and peeled it away from the ground. We watched as she brushed the dirt off a wide wooden plank that had been under the tarp and lifted it by its edge, revealing a cavity in the earth that held a lump covered with a piece of black plastic sheeting. The plastic concealed a well-worn, cream-colored Johnson ten-horsepower outboard.

Chief Ortega looked at me and pointed to the motor.

“¿Es ésta su motor?” Is this your motor?

“No.” I shook my head.

We were led down the central path to a different hut and shown another motor, an old, black Mercury fifteen-horsepower, hidden under a blanket that was covered by a fishnet.

“¿Es ésta su motor?” asked the chief.

“No,” I said. Of course it wasn’t. Chief Ortega knew perfectly well that we were looking for a Suzuki two-horse. He was just going through the motions, demonstrating his authority.

“Well, whose motors are these?” asked Mike. “They must be stolen, why else would they be hidden? These people don’t even have boats, except cayucos. You can’t put an outboard on a dugout.”

Carlos relayed the question to the police chief, who merely shrugged. Not his concern, I guess. We were preparing to board the launch after our fruitless search when a shrunken old man so elderly that his coffee-colored skin was wrinkled like a dried prune approached Chief Ortega. They spoke softly for a minute. The chief thanked him, nodded and boarded the boat.

Carlos told us the man had reported seeing Erby and three other villagers, who he had named, unloading a small outboard motor from their cayuco late last night. He apologized for their behavior, saying they had brought shame to the village, and promised to send a messenger to inform the chief when they arrived back home. We returned to town empty-handed.

We’d just finished washing the breakfast dishes the next morning when we heard our boat being hailed over the VHF in Spanish.

“Caribe, Caribe, Caribe. Esta es la policía.” Chief Ortega was calling us.

I went to the station alone. Mike was occupied with some boat project and Carlos could not be located. When I arrived I found the chief behind his desk and a Mayan family sitting on a bench along the left-hand wall. The man was staring down at the floor. The woman and a girl that I took to be her daughter were sobbing. The chief opened the padlock to a heavy wooden door at the back of the room and motioned me inside.

Erby stood in the center of the small room, hands cuffed behind his back. I didn’t recognize him at first. He was about twenty-five, but the defeated look on his face gave him the appearance of an older man. His straight hair was gapped, as if it had been recently cut with a knife. He wore jeans and a stained white cotton shirt. The chief pointed to him and asked if this was the right thief. I nodded.

Chief Ortega looked at Erby and asked, “¿Dónde está el motor?” Where is the motor?

Erby stared straight ahead and said nothing. The chief glared at him for a moment, then jerked back his arm and rammed his fist into Erby’s gut with all his might. Erby bent deeply at the waist, coughed, seemed about to vomit. After a while, he straightened and stood upright again, face flushed and blood engorged, eyes bulging. He regained his composure, jutted his chin defiantly and continued to look stoically ahead.

The blow had shocked me. I hadn’t expected it and didn’t really want this to be happening, especially over an old motor that didn’t run. It seemed too extreme, not proportionate. I told the chief as much, or at least tried to get my point across. He told me it was okay, not to worry. He would get the information, no problem. As he left the room I had the uneasy feeling that he had misunderstood me. He thought I believed he was not trying hard enough. He came back into the room holding a thick, clear plastic bag of medium size, the kind you get when you buy a twenty-pound bag of ice cubes. Erby eyed the bag. The chief winked at me and smiled. It occurred to me that the bag might be a standard piece of equipment here at the station. The chief took his time, casually holding the bag’s top open and shaking it into shape, holding it in front of Erby and grinning malevolently at him. He suddenly snapped it down, bagging Erby’s head. He tightened its mouth at Erby’s throat with his right hand, glanced at his watch and assumed an air of boredom. A look of panic gripped Erby’s features, his face clearly visible through the plastic. He started to buck and shake, sucking plastic into his mouth as he gasped for air. He was a thief, but I still felt bad for the guy. I thought the chief might kill him if he didn’t get the information he wanted. I protested.

“Está bien,” he said calmly, holding up his left hand while still holding the bag tight with his right. It’s okay. He held the bag sealed for several more long seconds as Erby’s body quaked and convulsed. When he was on the verge of unconsciousness the chief released his grip, grabbed the bag at the top of Erby’s head and jerked it off. Erby hungrily sucked air.

“¡Dónde está el motor!” screamed the chief.

Erby was talking a blue streak now. I understood hardly a word, but Chief Ortega was pleased. He smiled and said we would go back to the village now, with Erby, and this time we would find the motor.

I followed as he marched the handcuffed Erby to the dock, where Carlos was waiting by his launch. I was still a bit shaken by the “interview” and quickly losing interest in the whole endeavor, not really looking forward to another trip to the settlement. I told Carlos I would really just like to drop the whole thing and forget about the motor. I thought maybe Erby had learned his lesson. Would he please translate that to the chief?

“You cannot do that, man,” he said. “The chief has done very good work for you. He is proud of the work he has done. If you tell him to stop now it is all for nothing. It would humiliate him and he would be very pissed off. At you. And the thieves would go free. It would all be very bad, very bad for everybody.”

“Okay, let’s go then, maybe we’ll find the motor this time.”

We did not find the motor. The second visit to the village was a virtual replay of the first, with Erby pointing out the two hidden motors we’d already seen (How did he know about them? Did he steal them too?) and mumbling about how maybe somebody took “his” Suzuki. The police chief looked like he wanted to tear Erby’s head off. He was sullen and silent on the boat ride back, occasionally looking over to glare at Erby in disgust.

Back at the dock, Chief Ortega spoke briskly, with much waving of arms. Carlos translated.

“He says that he is ashamed that he has not been able to find your motor. He wants to apologize to you, but says it is really the fault of the Presidente and the new government rules. They do not let him use the old ways anymore. He is not allowed to leave marks on prisoners. These scumbag comunista students come here from the United States with their film cameras because of our civil war against the comunista rebels. They stir up trouble with the newspapers and force the government to give in to this stupidity. He has to baby these criminals now. How is he to get information from them? He can not even use simple tools like pliers anymore.”

“Carlos, he put a plastic bag over the guy’s head,” I said. “Erby thought he was gonna die and that didn’t make him talk. Or at least not tell the truth.”

“Well, that is true, but he did not charge you extra for that. He says it would be easy if he could use the old ways,” Carlos shrugged. “But he still thinks he will find the motor when he catches the other thieves. They will talk. They are just a bunch of pussy.”

“Pussies. Plural”

“Okay.”

Chief Ortega frog-marched Erby off the dock and up the street toward the police station, which also served as a jail. I studied Carlos’s shiny launch and the big Yamaha Enduro hanging on its transom.

“Carlos, why don’t these guys ever steal your motors? You and the other river guides don’t even lock them at night. You just tie your boats to a tree with a skinny rope.”

“They know better. We don’t treat thieves the way gringos do. We hang them from the bridge.”

“Really?”

“A few years ago there was three of them hanging up there one morning. I am not saying who hung them, even if I know, and I am not saying I do. The police cut them down, but everybody saw. Nobody stole nothing for a long time after that. They know better, you bet.”

“Well, maybe your way works best,” I said. “I don’t know. At least those three won’t steal anymore.”

“We can kill him for you. I mean, not me, but there are people who can, no problem. The police will not care and you no have to do nothing. For you, I think only five hundred dollars.”

“No.”

“Okay, it could be less. How much you want to pay?”

“I’m not trying to get a deal, I just don’t want to have anything to do with killing anybody.”

“Why not?” he asked, incredulous. “He is a thief.”

“I don’t want to have anything to do with it. It’s not right and it’s illegal. It’s too much just for stealing an old motor.”

“Gringos,” he said, shaking his head sadly. “No wonder they steal from you.”

Happy hour conversation at Mario’s Marina Bar was spirited that afternoon. Carlos’s proposition became the topic of the day and the opinions of cruisers flowed as freely as the ice-cold bottles of Gallo, Brahva and Victoria.

“You should just hire him to kill the bastard,” said Larry, “and be done with it. At least find out the lowest price. Maybe we could take up a collection.”

“Seriously though, you gotta prosecute these guys. If they get off scot-free nobody will be safe,” said Sharon.

“I’m serious,” said Larry. “Dead men don’t steal and they make good examples.”

“I’m not having him killed. You can if you want. I don’t know about prosecuting either. I do see what you’re saying, but we’re leaving the country in a week if the weather’s okay,” I said. “We’ve been up here three months already; it’s almost Thanksgiving. Hurricane season’s over. I’m tired of this green river water. We want to hurry on out to the reefs in Belize, where there’s no color to the water, so we can spend a few months there and spend some time in the Yucatán, too. We’re running low on cruising chips. We need to get to Florida, or somewhere, within about six months, so we can make a little money.”

“Maybe you can just start the ball rolling and disappear. It’s not like in the States, maybe you won’t have to be here for the trial,” said Tom. “Go talk to Eduardo, he can tell you how it works.”

Mike motored up to the marina, tied his dingy to the dock and waved as he walked over to the bar. He bought a bottle of Gallo and carried it to our table.

“Randy, good news. The police have all four of the perps in jail. I just saw the chief in town. I told him that was good work, but he’s upset that he didn’t find your motor, I think. Something about not being able to question the thieves? Anyway, I guess he thinks his job is done. How much did you have to pay him?”

“I gave Carlos two hundred quetzales, I guess the chief got it. That’s just fifty per thief,” I said, “a bargain.”

“That’s a great deal,” Mike said, “it would stop a lot of bullshit if you could catch a thief and put him in jail for nine dollars back in the States. What are you going to do with these guys now?”

“Well, Carlos tells me I can have Erby whacked for five hundred dollars, probably a lot less, but since they have four of ‘em now, maybe I could get a quantity discount,” I said. “I guess they would have to get out of jail first but I’m not sure, maybe they can kill ‘em in jail?”

“Go for it,” Mike grinned.

“Nah, I’m gonna pass on that. Everybody thinks we should prosecute, but we want to leave the country, not get hung up in court. I guess we’ll go talk to this guy Eduardo and see what he thinks.”

“No, listen, you have to prosecute these guys,” Sharon insisted. “They know we’re all just passing through and think they can steal our stuff and get clean away with it, and now you’re going to prove them right. That’s not fair to the rest of us.”

“Take it easy, I already said I see your point. Let us talk to Eduardo first and then figure out what to do.”

Eduardo was a local businessman with some kind of vague connection to the cruising community and was known as a politically savvy operator. Cheryl and I met him in a waterfront restaurant the following afternoon. “Hello Eduardo,” I said. “How are you today?”

“I am very well thank you, and yourselves?” He was dressed in a white guayabera, jeans and leather sandals.

“We’re fine, thanks, and thank you for seeing us, and for offering your advice. I guess you know all about the details of our problem with the thieves?”

“Everyone on the Rio knows about that, my friend,” he laughed. “You have given us all a little much needed entertainment.”

​“Well, it hasn’t been so entertaining for us. I can’t say it hasn’t been interesting but we’d really like to wind this up so we can sail to Belize. We’d like to know if there’s any way to prosecute these guys and still leave the country within a week or so?”

​“I am afraid not. You will have to go down to Livingston for the trial. I think it can be done there, but I am really not sure. And you might have to wait a while.”

“Livingston?” Cheryl practically spat the word. “We hate Livingston. We were afraid to spend even one night at anchor there when we checked in, so we motored upstream for a mile to anchor for the night. It was almost dark by the time we finished checking in, but we left anyway.”

“Yes, I am afraid you might have more thieves to prosecute if you spend much time there. You could always stay here in the marina area and have a river guide run you back and forth,” he suggested. “If it can even be done there.”

“Well, let’s just say we did want to prosecute these guys,” I said, “how would it work?”

“First, you have to hire a judge.”

“Hire a judge?” Cheryl said, disbelief evident in her tone.

“Yes, then you have to hire a prosecutor.”

“So we have to pay for these officials ourselves?” I couldn’t believe this was right. “How do the locals afford to do that?”

“They do not afford it. It is not much of a problem for them anyway. When there is crime, which is not very common lately, it is more often against foreigners, since most of the locals do not have anything worth stealing. The officials are not expensive by American standards, but you are right, most of the locals can only afford the necessities of life. They prefer to just deal with the problem directly. Actually, even the wealthy people do it that way most of the time. They seldom prosecute in court.”

“You mean they deal with it by killing the thieves?”

“Well, maybe not by killing, I would not want to imply that, but they have their ways,” Eduardo said. “Anyway, they will be kept in jail even without prosecution, so I would not worry too much. And here, the family must feed the prisoners. They will not get food in jail like they would in America, at least not enough.”

“I don’t understand,” I said, “how long will they be kept if we don’t prosecute?”

“Probably at least six weeks, maybe three or four months if the police do not like them,” Eduardo speculated.

“And what if we do prosecute, and win, how long will they be kept then?”

“Of course you will win if you hire the officials. And then maybe they will stay in jail six months, not much more, unless you pay extra. You get what you pay for, as you say in North America.”

“Well, that’s not a hard choice. Why does anybody ever prosecute anybody?” I asked.

“Exactly.” He spread his hands grandly, as if to indicate that I’d discovered a great truth. We thanked him for his help, walked back to the dock and went home to Caribee.

We related the details of our conversation with Eduardo to the roundtable crowd at Mario’s that evening. Most of them understood our decision to sail away and let Guatemalan justice take its course, but a few were convinced that we were unleashing a crime wave against all gringos on the river by not prosecuting. However, even they were somewhat mollified to hear that the thieves would likely spend at least several weeks locked up in jail. From what I’d seen I concluded that the police definitely did not like Erby, so early release seemed unlikely.

We stayed on the river long enough to celebrate the Thanksgiving holiday. There were quite a few American sailors and expats in the area, and most got together for festivities at Mario’s, Suzanna’s, or one of the other marinas. After the parties were over, we finished making the last-minute preparations that are always necessary when leaving one country to sail to another. We said our goodbyes and our see-you-out-there-somewheres to as many friends as we could find and headed back down to the sea, back to our beloved Livingston, to check out with the officials there. Caribee crossed the river bar at high tide, exchanging fresh water for salt, bound for Belize, where the humidity’s low and the trade winds blow.





◆◆◆



It was six months later when I next heard about Erby. We were anchored behind the lovely little island town of Isla Mujeres, Mexico, on the northeast tip of the Yucatan Peninsula, waiting for settled weather so we scoot five hundred miles across the Gulf of Mexico to Mississippi. It was the middle of May and we wanted to make the passage before the hurricane season started to gear up in June. This was the bittersweet finish to our Central American cruise, the end of the line. Once we weighed anchor here it wouldn’t touch the bottom again until we were in the Land of the Free.

I’d slipped away under a gibbous moon for a solo harbor sail in Stubby, not ready quite yet to turn loose of these gorgeous tropical nights. I was just sailing back and forth, tacking between the anchored yachts with no particular destination in mind, sipping from a cool bottle of my newest favorite regional Mexican beer, Leon Negra.

As I sailed behind one of the anchored boats I heard someone singing Robert Nesta Marley’s “No Woman No Cry” to the accompaniment of an onboard stereo system. The singer was off-key but the voice was familiar. I was sure it was Mike, but the boat wasn’t Draker. I sailed up close to the starboard side and spilled the wind from Stubby’s sail, letting her slow nearly to a stop.

“Hey Mike, is that you?” I called out.

“Who’s that?” he asked. No doubt about it, it was Mike.

“It’s Randy, from Caribee.”

“No shit!” he laughed. “I figured you were long gone from the Yucatan by now. Pull up here man, I want to talk to you.”

I sheeted in the sail and let it fill, then tacked around and luffed up alongside his boat. I stood up in Stubby and held onto the caprail, letting the light nighttime wind spill from the sail. We exchanged greetings and talked for a few minutes, catching up on our respective plans. He told me he was crewing for an old guy who wanted to sail to Cuba and couldn’t find anyone else who wanted to go with him. “The captain’s down below now, sleeping,” Mike explained. “He’s pretty old, too old to be out doing this, I think.”

“This is an American flagged boat, huh?” I asked.

“Yeah, I’m fairly sure he’s going to get in trouble when he goes on up to the States from Cuba. What I’m not sure about is how much trouble I’m gonna get in,” he laughed.

“I hear they won’t stamp your passport in Cuba if you’re American and ask them not too.”

“That’s right, but I figure the Feds still might find out. I mean, how hard can it be? They’ve got planes all over the Straits of Florida looking for drug boats. They can just read the boat’s name off the transom.”

“Maybe you’ll get lucky,” I said.

“Yeah, maybe so. Hey, I heard you killed Erby. Good work, man, he needed it.”

“What? No. He’s dead? He was alive when we left the Rio as far as I know. Who told you that?”

“All I know is he’s dead and everybody says that gringo killed him,” Mike said. “It’s a good thing, no worries, we’re all glad you did it.”

“I didn’t do it, I was out of the country. When was this?”

“Don’t sweat it man, nobody cares. We all know you were out of the country, but figured you bought the hit before you left.”

“No, not me, I didn’t do it. I don’t know anything about it.”

He laughed a hearty laugh. “I was just messin’ with you,” he said. “We didn’t really think it was you. But he’s dead all right, graveyard dead, shot in the head. But it was another cruiser that did it, or maybe it was the police, nobody really knows and nobody cares, either. Good riddance.”

He went on to explain how Erby had hired on to work for the captain of a cruising catamaran anchored just downstream from Fronteras, cleaning the decks and bottom and doing odd jobs. The owner went away for a weekend and left the cat unattended. When he got back the boat had been cleaned out. Everything of value was gone. The clincher came when Erby returned to work on Monday morning wearing the owner’s watch. He clearly hadn’t gotten any smarter. An investigation and arrest followed. The owner was assured that Erby would be in custody for months, and no effort would be spared in the quest to recover his stolen valuables.

Two weeks later the owner was shopping in town when he saw Erby riding a bicycle down Highway CA13. Furious, he picked up a stick of wood and clubbed him in the head as he rode by, then dragged him back to the police station where Chief Ortega assured him that Erby would not escape again. But he was seen walking around town once more within days. The police had apparently lost interest in holding him.

There was a celebration of some event or other one night shortly after that, complete with the ubiquitous fireworks that are a way of life in Guatemala. The way Mike told it, at the end of the night Erby’s body was discovered in a ditch beside the road near where the fireworks had been launched, a bullet in his head. Maybe Carlos finally found a sensible gringo, one who appreciated the effectiveness of frontier justice.





Finn





Well, how does it look?” I was in the cockpit holding the tiller, waiting for Cheryl’s verdict. She peered down at the white sand bottom from the bow pulpit, trying to decide if there was enough water over it for us to slip through without grounding.

“It looks thin; don’t try it.”

“Depth sounder shows seven feet here. Maybe it looks more shoal than it really is because the water’s so clear.”

“Well, if it’s only seven here it’s definitely less than six up there,” she said. “I can see the little fish swimming close to the bottom and I can see every blade of the conch grass.”

We had dropped all sail and were virtually dead in the water a mile to the northwest of Alligator Cay. The wind was light, the surface calm. The Volvo ticked over at idle speed, in neutral. I studied the two cruising guides for clues. They both indicated that the southern approach should have a minimum of six feet at low tide, and it was more than three hours past the lows. Cheryl came back to the cockpit to look at the sketch charts.

“Maybe we should just anchor and let the tide come in some more,” she said. “This is an okay place to wait for a while. The reef will break up the seas. We could launch the dinghy while we wait and go up ahead to sound it out with the lead line.”

“Sounds like a good idea.”

We heard the throaty roar of a big outboard spooling up and looked up to see a red speedboat blast out of the cut between the two islands off our bow, the same cut we were attempting to enter. It made a sweeping turn to starboard and headed straight toward us. When it got close the Mayan driver throttled back and let the twenty-five-footer drop off plane. As he idled up beside us a slight but muscular, crinkle-faced, sun-browned white man dressed only in cutoff jeans bounded onto the foredeck of the speedboat.

“Velcome to Bluefield,” he shouted. “How much do you draw?” He had an unusual accent for this part of the world, European or Scandinavian I thought. His hair was cropped close and he sported a five-day beard.

“Almost six feet,” I said.

“She’s a Nicholson terty-two, ain’t she,” he said, flashing a half-toothless grin.

“She is. Not too many people know that over here.”

“I know me boats. Follow me. Ve’ll go around to de norteast entrance.”

“Can’t we get through this way?” I asked. “The guides say it should be deep enough.”

“Hell no, dem bloody cruisin’ books vill run you aground every time. Tro dem overboard. You got plenty of vater de udder vay. You von’t get six feet tru dis vay.”

I don’t like to follow anybody through an entrance even if they claim local knowledge unless I have a reason to believe they really know what they’re doing. In this case we already knew about the northeast entrance, but it appeared on the chart to be narrower than I’d have liked. We had also been hoping to save a little distance by coming in from the south. Still, it didn’t seem like there would be much danger in following so long as we went slowly and double-checked our position as we went.

“Okay, lead off; we’ll follow you,” I said.

“Emilio, go dat vay, de nort end,” he said to the driver, “and don’t go too fast, dis ain’t no speedboat followin’ us.”

The driver swung around and headed off to the northwest at slow speed, giving the sandbar that extended southward from the islands a wide berth. We followed a couple of hundred feet behind. As we approached the reefs at either side of the entrance, we checked to see that our course agreed with the charts. Yep, the compass was showing a bearing of 103 degrees magnetic to the northern end of the island. We passed between the ends of two submerged coral reefs and swung to the south, heading for the small anchorage that nestled in the pocket formed by three small, low mangrove islands. These three cays constituted Bluefield Range. We waved our thanks, picked a spot, dropped the hook, and settled in. Caribee was the only boat in the anchorage.

We watched the speedboat idle up to a slender, rickety wooden dock that extended from what the older of our two cruising guides referred to as Ricardo’s fish camp. The newer book called it Ricardo’s Resort, also known as Ricardo’s Beach Huts: a collection of pale turquoise wooden shacks supported on stilts. The two men climbed onto the dock, tied up the boat and disappeared into one of the huts. We went below to rest and get out of the sun for a few minutes before flaking and covering the sails. We’d just sat down when we heard a knock on the hull. We came out into the cockpit to find the little sixtyish munchkin of a man who’d piloted us in standing balanced in a narrow twelve-foot-long unpainted dugout cayuco and holding on to Caribee’s lifelines.

“Permission to come aboard, Captain?”

“Sure, come on up,” I answered. “You can tie your cayuco to this sheet winch if you want.”

He clambered over the lifelines, stood on the cockpit seat, jutted out his chest and extended his right hand. “I’m Finn,” he said. “From Norvay, but I been here plenty of years. I’m de chef.”

“I’m Randy. This is Cheryl.”

“Do you have any beer?”

“We have a few, but no cold ones right now.”

“Dat’s okay, I like ‘em varm too,” he said, a mischievous twinkle lighting his eyes.

“We’ve got some rum if you’d rather have a drink of that.”

“Even better.”

We invited him below and poured him a drink: rum, neat, in a short glass.

“Thanks for guiding us in,” Cheryl said.

“Dat’s no problem, I do dat for all de yachts if dey don’t know how to come in.” He tipped the glass back and drained it. “I’m a sailor too. I vas in de merchant marines for twenty years, on and off. I vas cookin’ for sailors by de time I vas seventeen. I still am, here at Bluefield now.”

“We may have dinner with you tonight if you’re open. I think Cheryl’s a little tired of galley duty.”

“Course ve’re open, any time ve got a yacht anchored, or guests in de rooms.”

“What’s on the menu?”

“Vell, you can have lobster, or you can have fish, or you can have conch. You can even have all tree. Vith rice, and one of my special breads. A salad too if ve have enough vege left. You vill like it, everybody likes my cookin’.”

“What about some cold beers; do you have ice out here?”

“Yeah, ve got a little ice left, but Ricardo’s gone to Belize so de beer’s locked up.”

“He locks the beer up when he leaves?” Cheryl asked.

“Yeah, I don’t know vhy he does dat, just a habit I tink. You mind if I have anudder touch of rum?”

“Go ahead,” Cheryl said.

Finn poured himself a healthy measure and took a gulp. “You lucky Randy. You got a pretty lady in Cheryl here. Dat’s de one ting I miss. It’s beautiful out here on de cays, but it can be lonely. I sure miss me girls. I vas married to two beautiful girls, and I do miss ‘em, I truly do.”

“You had two wives?” I asked. “At same time?”

“Oh fook no, dat vouldn’t verk too good, vould it,” he cackled. “Not vid dem two, it vouldn’t. It’s hard for me to talk about me girls. I miss ‘em too much. It makes me sad. I better have one more spot of rum.”

He filled his glass almost to the brim again and gulped half of it in one slug. “Dat’s good sippin’ rum. Some say Zacapa is better, but I like de Botran jus fine. Udder people say de Guatemalan rum is all sheet, but dey fookin’ crazy. You vant sheet, drink de cheap local stuff. Dat’s some sheet. But I drink it anyway.” He picked up his glass and drained the rest. “Nothin’ wrong vid dat rum. Can I use your head?”

“Sure, right there, just use it and we’ll pump it out later,” Cheryl said, “it’s easier than explaining how it works. It’s a little different than most heads. Just slide that door shut.”

“Dat’s okay, I vill leave it open. I can talk and pee at de same time.”

He walked into the head compartment, turned away from us and leaned down to raise the lid on the toilet. He stood up and unzipped his fly. A tinkling sound came from the bowl.

“De Nich terty-two is a good boat. I sailed on dese boats before. I like de shape of de keel,” he said, turning slightly in our direction as he spoke. When he turned the tinkling stopped. When he turned back it started again. Cheryl shot me a glance and rolled her eyes. “How long you had her?”

“A little less than three years now I guess. She’s our first real sea boat. She’s not exactly like we want her yet but we’ll get there. We plan to keep her for a long time, if we’re lucky.”

“Oh, she’s a good un all right, and faster dan a lot of de bigger ones. Solid as a rock. Dey got a lot of ‘em in England, where dey build ‘em. Not too many on dis side. Has she only been TA de one time?”

“We bought her in Florida, and the guy we bought her from had taken her over and back, so she’s a three-time trans-Atlantic vet,” I said.

He zipped up, weaved back to sit at the table, picked up the rum bottle and added two fingers to his glass. “I got to be careful not to drink too much. Ve got some resort guests coming dis afternoon, and Ricardo tole me to make ‘em a nice meal as soon as dey reach. No messin’ around dis time.”

“How are they going get here?” Cheryl asked. “Is somebody going to get them with the boat?”

“No, dey are kayakers, with sailing kayaks.”

“I hate to tell you, but some sailing kayaks are coming into the harbor right now,” I said, pointing toward the two colorful little sails slipping down the bay.

“Oh bloody fookin’ hell; I got to go now!” He grabbed his glass, gulped the rum and slammed it down empty on the table. “Oh hell, I’m fooked.”

He scampered up the companionway steps into the cockpit and untied the cayuco’s painter from the winch. We followed him up. He pulled the dugout alongside and dropped down into it, a bit too much off center. The little log craft rolled dangerously to one side. He grabbed our rail for stability, narrowly saving himself from capsize. He sat down and paddled toward the dock at a frenzied pace, weaving first to starboard, then to port, but ending up where he wanted to be—alongside the narrow planked walkway of the dock. As he stood up to climb out the cayuco rolled again, and this time he wasn’t so lucky. He fell back into the water with a splash. After some flailing around and a couple of botched attempts to stand up, he found his footing in the three-foot-deep water. He staggered along beside the dock toward shore, dragging the cayuco behind him, muttering and shaking his head.

“Do you think he has a drinking problem?” Cheryl asked.

“Not much.”

“Maybe we’d better just have dinner onboard tonight.”

We went ashore the next morning to explore and check out the resort/fish camp. A young American couple sat at a hardwood table in the dining area of the main shack drinking coffee from porcelain-enameled steel cups. We didn’t ask how their dinner had been. They were preparing to depart for Colson Cay, five miles to the south, where they planned to camp for a couple of nights before pressing on. They’d flown down for a six-week kayak tour of the cays behind Belize’s barrier reef.

They would have been hard pressed to find a better destination for the adventure. The reef stretches virtually the entire distance from Mexico to Guatemala. At a hundred and twenty miles in length it’s the second longest barrier reef in the world. It forms a natural breakwater that shields an exquisite strand of cays and inner reefs from the pounding Caribbean waves. The resulting patch of flat water is ideal for the navigation of small craft of all types, but especially so for sailing vessels, which get all the wind but none of the waves.

Ricardo’s place was a modest affair, with a good deal of funkiness baked in. He’d taken advantage of available building materials whenever he could and the little resort’s fish camp origins were evident. The “beach huts” were built on pole stilts, which kept them about two feet above shallow water at most tide levels but left them standing over almost dry land when the tide was low. There was scant evidence of a beach. The huts were simply constructed and sided with painted plywood and pine boards. The main building housed the dining area and kitchen and served as a general headquarters. The simple dining room was paneled with split bamboo poles and offered a delightful view of the anchorage and the azure waters beyond. The faint music of waves crashing against the distant reef played in the background, accompanied by the rattle of palm fronds rustling in the breeze. The walls were adorned with a collection of tattered national flags of the world and a large nautical chart of the local waters. There was a stack of old sailing magazines on a small corner table. Like any good campsite, the place had all you’d need to live simply for a time, free from the distractions of the outside world. The physical and emotional distance from civilization was palpable. Unfortunately, our circumstances dictated that we soon venture out of this haven and make a foray into the real world, the one populated by the bureaucrats that you can never seem to escape for long no matter where you go on the planet.

Belize had few restrictions on the foreign boats that cruised its waters, but their crews were a different matter. We had been issued standard tourist visas upon entry and were required to extend them every thirty days, for a maximum of ninety days, whereupon we would be obligated to leave the country, at least temporarily. The problem was that the only place where visas could be extended was at the main office of the Department of Immigration in Belize City. Cruisers detested this policy because so many of the best anchorages were far from the city, and there was no grace period beyond thirty days. Throw in an allowance for bad traveling weather, and it put sailors on a short leash. There were no protected anchorages near the city and there was a crime problem in the surrounding area. Though the outlying cays and atolls were quite safe, anchoring off the Fort George Hotel or near the mouth of Haulover Creek virtually guaranteed that your dinghy would be stolen when you left it tied up to go ashore. Locks were no deterrent. The boarding of anchored yachts by thieves was not especially uncommon near the city, either.

There were two viable alternatives for cruisers wishing to visit the city. One was to take your boat to the secure marina at Moho Cay, a short boat ride from town on the marina’s launch. The other was to ride in from one of the outer islands on a speedboat, normally one of the ones making scheduled runs between the city and the more populous outlying cays. Neither method was problem free, but a monthly trip was unavoidable due to the immigration requirements. Speedboat rides from the more remote cays were hard to come by, but we were lucky. Ricardo’s boat made a shopping run every few days and the Bluefield crew kindly offered us a ride on the next trip. Cheryl was somehow not tempted by the charm of Belize City, so we decided that I would take both passports in for visa stamps, which the authorities allowed, so long as the most important part of the process was completed—the payment of the fees.

It was a Wednesday, two days before our deadline, when the resort’s launch made the next run to town. Emilio piloted the boat and Finn and I rode along. My understanding was that Emilio was a fisherman that was helping out at the resort on a temporary basis. Finn had to attend to some unspecified business and Emilio was to gather supplies for the cay. The morning sun warmed our backs as the boat eased out of the anchorage. When we reached open water Emilio cracked open the big Yamaha’s throttle, brought the boat up onto a plane and aimed for Belize City, eighteen miles to the northwest. Brilliant sunbeams splintered on the wave tops, sparkling like diamonds scattered on a deep blue cloth. We skipped across the surface, keeping our eyes peeled for the big manatees that often feed in the shallows. We sped past Middle Long Cay and The Triangles, over the aptly named Twelve Feet Bank and finally across the slightly deeper waters of The Flat. In little more than half an hour we were closing on Baron Bliss Light, the beacon that sits at the easternmost point of the city.

The water changed from blue to brown as Emilio guided the boat into the mouth of Haulover Creek, also known as the Belize River, and headed for the heart of the city at no-wake speed to avoid rocking the dozens of traditional fishing boats lining the shore. The creek’s muddy banks were the site of the original settlement of Belize Town, established more than three centuries earlier. The waterway had endured as an artery of commerce and was now crowded with the buildings of modern-day Belize City.

The small city of sixty thousand is an intriguing mixture of past and present, with the feel of an old British colonial port town that has been reluctantly dragged into the future, kicking and screaming all the way. Wooden fishing smacks can often be seen sailing in the harbor, passing in front of anchored bulk carriers that are using cranes to load raw sugar off of barges. Airplanes on final approach to the runway near Ladyville slip from view behind the second-floor verandas of nineteenth-century wooden homes. Upscale buildings are sprinkled among decomposing structures covered with layers of peeling paint. There is a pronounced third-world ambiance. As the principal city of an English-speaking country that has a substantial African population it has an atmosphere that’s more old time Caribbean than Central American.

As we continued up the creek the sounds and smells of the city drifted out from the banks and beyond—car horns, raised voices, exhaust fumes and cooking-grease smoke overlaid with the tidal fish-stink of river water. We pushed on, penetrating the tumult, slipping past the raucous commotion of the city market, under Swing Bridge at the end of Queen Street (billed as the world’s only functioning, manually powered pivoting bridge) and on to the wooden dock at Jan’s Shell Station. Emilio edged up to the dock and tied up the boat to buy gasoline and let Finn and me off to run our errands.

“Meet back here at five,” he said. “That will give you plenty of time, won’t it?”

“That’s more than enough for me,” I said, “I just have to go to Immigration and do a little food shopping. If I have some extra time I may do some sightseeing.”

“I’ll be here before five,” said Finn.

“Finn, remember what Ricardo always says,” said Emilio. “Stay out of the bars.”

“Ya, ya, stay out of de bars.”

“Stay out of the bars, Finn. Please.”

Finn and I set out walking east along North Front Street, parallel to the creek. When we reached the intersection with Queen Street we parted ways. Finn turned right and crossed Swing Bridge, walking into the south section of the city, and I turned left and headed north, consulting the hand-drawn map I’d constructed from the cruising guides, with some added input from Finn. I passed the police station, turned left on Barracks Road and walked directly to the immigration office. I didn’t want to get shut out by their lunch hour, which might possibly last most of the afternoon.

The extension process was relatively painless but my request for sixty-day visas for the two of us was summarily denied, which I had of course expected, meaning another trip to the city would be required within a month. I spent the afternoon wandering around, shopping and soaking up the atmosphere. I had lunch in a modest Creole-style café run by a Garifuna family. I thought about what a shame it was that there was no safe anchorage nearby, because this would be an interesting place to hang out for a while. When it was nearly time to meet the boat at Jan’s I doubled back to some of the shops I had visited earlier and bought some specialty foods and produce. I hadn’t bought anything earlier in order to avoid lugging the stuff all over town in my backpack. Emilio was sitting on a bench at the dock when I walked up.

“Where’s Finn,” he asked.

“No idea. He headed south across the bridge right after we left here.”

“Damnation to hell for him. He’s in some bar for sure. I hope we don’t have to go find him.”

We waited by the dock until five-thirty. The sun sank toward the roofs of the buildings to our west. Emilio was restless.

“Well, shit,” he said. “We might as well start hitting some bars. The longer we wait, the longer it will take to find him.”

“Will my stuff be okay in the boat?”

“Yeah, sure, nobody will bother anything here.”

We headed back down North Front and started searching in what seemed like a kind of grid pattern. We zigged up side streets and zagged down alleyways, ducking into meager rum shops and dim beer joints.

“Finn, you in here?” Emilio shouted through the doorways as he went in. “Have you seen Finn today?” he asked barkeepers and the regulars. No, nobody had seen him, though nobody acted like they didn’t know who he was.

“Well, I don’t know what the hell,” said Emilio. “Maybe we have to go ask the police. He has to be somewhere. Somehow it will be my fault if we go back without him. I don’t know why I even care. I know a couple of more places we can try.”

We walked toward the waterfront and I followed Emilio down a side street and up some broad, wooden steps into yet another watering hole, this one bigger than the rest. As soon as we walked through the door we could see that there was a ruckus in the barroom. A crowd of drinkers was circled around the commotion in the middle of the room, slapping their knees and howling with laughter. We edged closer, trying to get a look. And then we saw.

Finn and a black man with dreadlocks were flailing away at each other. Finn was getting his ass kicked, literally, but so was the other guy. Finn had hold of the guy’s hair with his left hand, and Dreadlocks had his left elbow hooked around Finn’s head. They were each pummeling the back of their opponent’s head with their right fist while standing on their left leg and kicking the other guy’s ass with their right foot, but neither seemed to be doing much damage. They were spinning around in circles that way. The spectators were beside themselves, laughing and cheering wildly. I’d never seen anything like it. I looked at Emilio and we both burst out laughing. One of them tripped and they both fell to the floor in a tangle, still flailing fists and legs at each other. Emilio jumped on Finn and grabbed his arms, dragging him away from his opponent, while a black man pulled Dreadlocks away in the opposite direction. Finn staggered to his feet and tried to break free.

“Lemme at dat Rasta muddarfooker!” he screamed, his face red, eyes bulging.

“Calm down, calm down Finn!” Emilio yelled, squeezing Finn’s arms in a bear hug.

The Rasta was yelling gibberish at Finn, spittle spraying from his mouth. His friends were holding him back.

“I’ll kick your arse til deres nothin’ left to kick!” Finn yelled. “My foot will be up your arse to the knee!”

“Let’s get him out of here,” Emilio said.

He pushed Finn to the door, still holding him by the arms. I followed them out the door and we started down the street in the gathering darkness. A few steps away from the bar Finn started to laugh and Emilio released his arms.

“Why do you have to pull this shit, man,” said Emilio.

“Dat,” he said, pointing toward the bar, “vas not my fault. He jumped me.”

“Why would he do that?” I asked.

“I don’t know. He said I tried to take his voman one time.”

“Is that true?” Emilio asked.

“Hell no, he just wants to cause trouble. I don’t tink so, but who can remember everyting dat happen every time dey come to town?”

“Man, I’m not bringing you to town no more. I shouldn’t even be on this trip anyway. Ricardo can drive his own boat.”

“It ain’t my fault if somebody jump me. How’s dat my fault?”

“Come on,” Emilio said. “We hang around and maybe the police show up and you get to stay in town longer than you want.” He looked Finn’s face over. “You okay?”

“He didn’t hurt me none. Dem fookin’ Nazis tried to kill me ven I vas a little kid in Norvay but dey didn’t do it, so dey sure ain’t no Rasta gonna hurt me much now.”

We got in the boat. Emilio started the Yamaha, untied the lines from the dock and pointed us downstream, looking over his shoulder toward the dock as we slipped into the concealing night and headed toward the mouth of the creek and the open water beyond.

“Help me watch for boats,” he said. “I can’t see too good with all these lights on the shore, it messes me up.”

We slipped cautiously down the narrow creek, squinting into the night at the deceptive play of shadow and light on the muddy water, hoping to pick out any traffic that might pose a collision threat. Once we’d passed Baron Bliss Light and gained the open water Emilio brought the boat up to speed and pointed it in a generally southeasterly direction. The night was clear but there was no moon. Starlight was our only illumination.

“We don’t have any running lights, huh?” I said. I had been in the Caribbean long enough to know it was a stupid question, but I asked it anyway.

“Dat’s a States ting,” Finn said. “Ve don’t use dem here. Nobody does.”

“I noticed that. You just count on luck I guess?”

“There’s a lot of room out here,” Emilio said. “Not many boats. We don’t have many wrecks.”

“Yeah,” I said, “what are the chances.”

“I never worry, but there was a bad crash a few years ago, some people hurt bad, killed one I think.”

“Well, I hope we’re lucky. You’d never even hear their engine before the crash, not over our outboard’s noise, not at this speed.”

“Some a dem bar guys always lookin to start trouble,” Finn offered. “You know dat?”

“Finn, just stop til we get back,” Emilio said. “Okay?” He turned back to me. “Yeah, it’s a little dangerous I guess, but that’s just how we do it. We should have been back before dark anyway, but somebody made us late.”

“How can you find Bluefield at night? You don’t even have a compass.”

“Don’t have to find it, I know where it is,” he laughed. “No, I watch the lights of town until they get too far away and by then I can see the outline of Bluefield against the sky, unless it’s real cloudy, or raining. Then I could get lost I guess.”

We made it to Bluefield just fine that night, no collisions and as far as we knew, no near misses. Caribee spent a few more days lying snug in the well-protected anchorage at Bluefield. We went snorkeling and spearfishing on the reef. We sailed Stubby out to Rendezvous Cay to explore the tiny speck of white sand where pirates once met to plan raids on silver-laden Spanish galleons riding the offshore current up to Havana. We ate Finn’s superb lobster, conch and fish dinners. He flirted shamelessly with Cheryl, even tempting her with the prized secret recipe for his famous puffy fried flatbread.

The time had come to move on. There was so much of Belize left to explore, and we’d soon have to start thinking about ways to get back to the city for our next encounter with officialdom. We said goodbye to Finn, Ricardo, Emilio and the small clan of fishermen that passed through and hung out at Bluefield Range.

Some years later we heard the sad news of Finn’s death. The report came via SSB radio on the Northwest Caribbean Cruisers Net. Finn had died in an apparent cayuco accident, with no other vessel involved. In a craft that moves at paddling speed that could only mean one thing: drowning. We made no assumptions or judgments about the circumstances and our sadness was somewhat lessened by the knowledge that Finn had died living the life he loved, making new friends and cooking for any sailor lucky enough to drop his hook behind the sandy little cay he called home.





Honey





We sailed out to Lighthouse Reef not long after we left Bluefield. Lighthouse is the most isolated of Belize’s three offshore atolls and I think the most beautiful. It lies thirty miles outside of the barrier reef and forty miles east of Belize City, just far enough off the beaten path to give it an air of isolation. There weren’t many cruisers in Belize in the nineties and only a handful of charter boats. Of those, only crewed charters were allowed to sail to Lighthouse because the atoll is littered with uncharted coral heads that can slice through a boat’s hull like a hot knife through butter. The chart shows a fringing reef surrounding a lagoon that’s about twenty miles long and five miles wide with a half-dozen sandy, palm-covered cays scattered along the reef. The lagoon area is not properly charted and is simply marked “numerous coral heads”, an understatement if ever there was one. It’s all gorgeous and unspoiled—white sand and coral awash in gin-clear water. It’s also home to the Blue Hole, made famous by Jacques Cousteau in the early seventies, and to the Half Moon Caye Natural Monument.

We motored into the lagoon through the southwest pass under a clear sky in a wind light enough to be called non-existent. Crossing into the shallows from the deep ocean, we headed toward the anchorage near Half Moon Cay at the southeast corner of the atoll. As its name implies, lighthouses mark the atoll, one on Half Moon and the other at the far north end, on Sandbore Cay. We dropped our anchor in nine feet of water near the southern lighthouse, an imposing tower that dates from the mid nineteenth century. The sailboat that was following us anchored nearby.

We had picked up the follower at the Moho Cay Marina near Belize City the day before. The boat’s American captain was a nominal single-handed sailor named Ed who had just taken on a new crewmember, a young woman in her twenties named Laura. His former crewman had jumped ship while Ed was on a short grocery-shopping excursion to Belize City, leaving a note over his bunk that read, “Couldn’t hack it anymore, sorry.” Laura was a backpacker on a Central American adventure who’d jumped at the chance to travel on a sailboat. When Ed heard that we were planning to sail to Lighthouse, he asked if we minded if they followed us through the coral hazards because he had no experience sailing through coral. We did, a little bit, because there’s always a sense of being responsible when somebody else is depending on your navigational skills to guide them, but we agreed anyway, to be polite I guess. Ed seemed nice enough in any case and we liked Laura.

The four of us spent the day after we arrived exploring the bird sanctuary on Half Moon. There were hundreds of red-footed boobies nesting in the trees and almost as many magnificent frigatebirds (also known as man o’war birds) nesting and soaring in the sky around the island. Their bright red pouches, inflated to attract females for mating season, added a spattering of colorful contrast to the green palm fronds. Frigates are pelagic birds that feed by plucking small fish from the ocean, yet don’t have the ability to take off from the water; if they ever land in the sea they will drown. It was incredible to be surrounded by so many flamboyant birds. Though we didn’t know it then, we would not see so many seabirds nesting in such a compact area until many years later when we reached the South Pacific motus of Suwarrow Atoll.

The next morning we weighed anchor and headed north, sailing in a moderate following breeze under mainsail alone, in order to open up the foredeck so that Cheryl could have good visibility for guiding us through the coral. Ed and Laura followed in our wake. By this point in our cruising lives we had picked up quite a bit of experience in eyeball navigation, mostly on the coral-studded banks of the Bahamas and more recently on the flats behind the barrier reef in southern Belize. The keys to safely navigating through coral are clear water, a cloudless sky, a lookout positioned high above the water and good light, which means having the sun high and behind you to reduce glare. The water couldn’t have been clearer, there wasn’t a cloud in the sky and the December sun was nearing its maximum southern declination, perfect conditions for eyeballing our way northward.

We decided to stop at Blue Hole on the way to Sandbore Cay and headed northwest across the lagoon in that direction. It didn’t take long before the coral got thick and the farther north we sailed the thicker it became. Cheryl was the lookout. She called out course corrections and I steered as she directed. She was twenty feet high in the rigging, standing on ratlines that I’d rigged to the shrouds for just this purpose. Ed kept yelling directions to Laura at the helm, as if she couldn’t see us directly in front of her.

“Go to starboard!” He pointed at us with his right hand while waving his left wildly in the air. Then he turned back to stare at Laura and see if she would follow his instructions. She looked ahead with little expression and followed in our wake. Ed grew more vocal and animated with each passing mile, even though it seemed to me that Laura was doing a flawless job of tracing our path.

Blue Hole is a geological marvel. It’s a perfectly round pit in the floor of the shallow lagoon, ringed by a barely-submerged inner coral reef. More than a thousand feet across, it plunges to a depth of nearly five hundred feet. Its name comes from the striking indigo hue of its deep, clear water. Aerial photos make it look almost like an illusion so stark is the contrast with the surrounding shallows. We sailed into the lee of its rim and anchored both boats a few minutes after ten o’clock. I figured we could afford to burn a couple of hours and still have a high enough sun for the nine-mile leg up to Sandbore. We got out our snorkeling gear and pole spears, hoping to find dinner swimming inside the hole.

Laura met us in the water. She said that Ed was too nervous to leave the boat and just wanted to get moving before “things got even worse”. We held our bodies flat and floated as high as we could to get over the reef; there was less than a foot of water over the rim. The bottom fell away into nothingness as we drifted out over the depths. It felt like flying over a canyon. It was eerie to be looking down hundreds of feet into the crystal water, the deep blue contrasting sharply with the light green of the lagoon. Shafts of sunlight pierced the depths, quivering and undulating. The only sound was the slight whistle of the wind blowing across the opening of my snorkel.

The spell was broken when I spotted a hogfish hanging motionless near the edge of the coral rim. I took a deep breath, pulled my pole spear back against its rubber sling, bent at the waist and kicked my fins as my legs submerged. I glided down slowly toward my prey, keeping my eyes locked onto him. The hogfish obligingly turned to show me a side profile and maximize the target area, a habit of these fish that does little for their survival rate. I opened my hand and released the spear. There was a satisfying thump as the three-pronged paralyzer tip buried just behind the fish’s head. True to its name, the tip instantly stopped all the fish’s movement and he hung stiffly at the end of my spear.

There had been a couple of big nurse sharks lurking under a ledge when we swam into the hole, but we hadn’t seen any of the more aggressive species said to live here. Still, I always remove speared fish from the water to keep from attracting sharks. I held the hogfish—a really big one that weighed close to five pounds—out of the water as I swam it over the reef and back to Caribee. The girls stayed out over the deep water until I got back. As soon as I swam back into the hole I saw another hogfish in almost the same spot and speared it too. I left my spear at the boat when I took that one back. Even though hogfish is our absolute favorite reef fish, these two would be all we could eat in a reasonable time even with Ed and Laura helping and I never take more than we really need.

We got underway before noon, again threading our way through increasingly heavy coral growth. Cheryl was back at her station in the rigging as we sailed up the lagoon under the mainsail, still using no jib and no engine. I had a mental plan to quickly spin Caribee around into the wind and drop the anchor if we should enter a dead-end pass, and almost every narrow channel we sailed into looked like it might be blocked up ahead. Ed was on his bow with a white-knuckled grip on the stainless steel tubing of the pulpit. He kept yelling for Laura to get closer to us while I signaled for her to back off.

“Ed, you’ve got to give us more space,” I shouted. “If we have to stop you’re going to run into us.” He just stared at our transom with his jaw set as if he couldn’t hear me from fifty feet away. Every time they fell a little behind he would start yelling and gesturing for Laura to close the gap. His nervousness was understandable because he had no coral experience and his heavy forty-five foot boat was a lot less maneuverable than ours. Caribee is an agile thirty-two footer that’s tiller-steered and can be virtually spun on a dime by comparison, but he didn’t seem to understand that he was making his situation more precarious by dogging us so closely.

Cheryl’s eyes were getting a good workout. She stared intently ahead and constantly called out changes in heading. “Go ten degrees to starboard. Okay, now turn twenty degrees to port as soon as you leave this big head to starboard.” She fed me a steady stream of directions, which I did my best to follow without second-guessing. I could see the clear path well enough from the helm but didn’t have the range that her vantage point provided. Several times she declared that we were in a dead-end pass, and just as I was about to spin around to anchor—hoping not to be overrun by Ed and Laura—she’d say to wait, keep going, she could see an exit. It would have been easier to motor through the maze but it was more of a challenge to sail it and we were having a lot of fun. It’s a good idea to practice sailing in tight quarters, too, to gain experience for that engine failure that always seems to happen at exactly the wrong time.

The Sandbore Cay lighthouse grew more distinct as we sailed north and soon we could make out individual palm trees on the island. The coral heads thinned out and the open spaces between them got bigger. A dolphin streaked out of nowhere, cut across our bow and leaped in a spinning arc. It cut back sharply and shot in front of us again and then started zigzagging between the two boats, leaping and spinning, again and again. Cheryl climbed down from the rigging, leaned across the lifelines and reached her arm out toward the dolphin. Dolphins playing around the boat always excite her. The dolphin raced straight toward us again and veered away at the last possible second. Exuberant playfulness like this is not unusual; several times in the past dolphins had played in our bow wake, sometimes for more than an hour. What was unexpected was to see a single one acting this way, and doing it in shallow water. They’re typically seen playing offshore in pods. When you do see individuals or pairs in bays and inlets, they tend to be concentrating on fishing.

We pulled close to the cay and anchored the boats two hundred feet apart. The dolphin was swimming from one boat to the other, leaping and chattering. Laura got into the dinghy and came over for a visit.

“Ed’s a nervous friggin’ wreck,” she said. “He’s down below drinking rum but his hands are still shaking. He thought he was going to lose his boat back there.”

“He was never really in danger,” I said, “except maybe of running over us.”

“It seemed okay to me. I figured all I had to do was follow you and if you were okay we would be too,” she shrugged. “You should have seen the veins standing out on his neck. I knew you didn’t want us to be so close but whenever I fell back he just went ape.”

The dolphin swam up beside the boat and looked up at us. Laura stood up and gave it a hand signal. “Hey, check out this dolphin. It’s an Atlantic Bottlenose and I think it may have been in a water park at one time from the way it’s acting. I was an apprentice dolphin trainer for a while. I’m going to get my snorkel gear and see how it reacts to me in the water, why don’t you guys join me?”

I thought the dolphin would probably leave when we got in the water but it came right up and rubbed against all of us, paying special attention to me.

“She’s a female,” Laura said. She made hand signals and gestures to the dolphin, but I couldn’t tell that it responded. After a while Laura agreed. “I think she’s just a wild dolphin that likes people. She doesn’t seem to recognize any of the standard signs.”

We stayed in for almost an hour. Cheryl commented at one point that somebody on the island was shooting fireworks, which sounded odd, but I didn’t give it much thought. The dolphin never left our sight and kept brushing her body against us and then rolling over so we could rub her belly and throat. She clearly loved the touching and allowed all of us to pet her at will. She became distressed when we tried to climb out of the water, though, going so far as to nudge us with her nose more aggressively than I liked. She was a powerful wild animal after all and she didn’t seem to want her new playmates to leave. It was also obvious that she had a particular attraction to me.





“It’s because she’s a girl,” Laura said. “She has a sexual attraction to you. The females always prefer to be around men. A lot of people don’t know this, but wild dolphins have sex six times a day on average.”

I was one of the people who didn’t know that and while I liked this dolphin just fine, she was going to have to stay frustrated on that score. As to why she was so interested in hanging out with people instead of her own kind, Laura surmised that her pod had ostracized her for some reason. Or maybe she’d left the pod on her own. She said both were sometimes known to happen.

As soon as we climbed into Caribee’s cockpit I heard Ed stridently hailing us on the radio. I dried off and went below to answer, apparently a little too leisurely to suit Ed.

“Why didn’t you answer me, didn’t you see my flares?” he screeched into the microphone.

“Flares? What’s wrong?”

“My anchor was dragging!”

I looked out the port at his boat, which was in exactly the same place he anchored it.

“Ed, there’s no more than twelve knots of wind, there’s no way your anchor has dragged. I can tell by looking that you’re in the same spot.”

Silence. He came back on and in a subdued tone said, “Well, maybe the wind direction just shifted a little and I swung around. It looks okay now. Sorry. I think I need a drink.”

“That’s what I saw,” Cheryl said, realization dawning. “When we were swimming with the dolphin. It wasn’t fireworks, it was Ed shooting flares.”

“I’ve never heard of anybody firing flares because they were dragging,” I said. “Why didn’t he just yell at us, he’s right there? Or if he thought he was dragging, why didn’t he just let out more chain? He could drag a mile before he hit anything here anyway.”

The next morning Laura came by to tell us they were going to leave later in the day. “Ed says he can’t handle the pressure anymore, he’s going to have a breakdown unless we get out of this damn place,” she said. “I have no idea what he’s talking about. Maybe it’s too beautiful for him? Whatever, I have no say in it, so I wanted to tell you guys goodbye.”

We went over in the dinghy to say goodbye to Ed and to wish him luck. He was sweating heavily, extremely worked-up by the prospect of leaving the atoll through the northern entrance because there was a coral head in the pass. He made us promise to rescue them if they hit the rock and sank. Laura rolled her eyes. I promised. I thought of suggesting that they just get in the dinghy and motor back into the lagoon in the unlikely event that the boat sank in ten feet of water, but instead suggested that he go look at the pass in his dinghy to locate the coral head before going through it with his boat. He said that would be way too frightening and that he might never leave if he saw it.

They left early that afternoon. As soon as they started pulling in the anchor chain the dolphin went berserk. She started zipping in front of their boat at high speed, jumping, blowing and chattering, splashing hard into the water near their bow. She leaped in front of them all the way to the pass. Once they were clear and in deep water (no collisions with coral) Laura called on the radio and said the dolphin had tried to stop them from leaving by running in front of them, and only when they were well offshore did she finally leave. Laura had no sooner gotten off the radio than the dolphin was next to our boat.

We spent another two weeks anchored beside Sandbore Cay. We were the only boat for miles around and got to know the dolphin very well. We never gave her a name and never knew she had one until we later met some cruisers who had seen her the year before we arrived. They told us that someone had named her Honey a few years back and the name had stuck. They were the first to tell us about her breaking the arm of a woman who had befriended her, though we heard about it from others later. The story was that Honey took exception to the woman leaving the water and rammed her into the swimming ladder of her boat. But all we knew at the time was that she was “our dolphin” and seemed to be quite fond of us. We had of course noticed her objection to us leaving the water and had implemented a way of dealing with it. When we were ready to get out we’d start swimming in a zigzag pattern with her playing along and then quickly jump into the dinghy when she zigged away in the opposite direction. She never caught on to that trick.

Spearfishing with Honey around was an exercise in futility. If she accompanied me to the reef there was absolutely no chance that I would see a fish because they all dived into holes with her first echolocation ping. We devised a way of distracting her so I could get a fish every once in a while. Cheryl would get in the water and play with her while I jumped into the dinghy and motored the mile out to the reef. It usually worked. When it didn’t I could expect to see her pull alongside the moving dinghy and stick a pectoral fin over the gunwale for me to hold.

One day when the technique had worked I returned from a fishing trip to hear Cheryl relay a fantastic story. After I’d made my escape in the dinghy, Cheryl had left the water and Honey had left the scene. Cheryl assumed that she had gone to the reef to find me, but a short time later heard the dolphin blowing and came out to look. Honey swam slowly toward Caribee behind a submerged orange-and-brown ball-like object. Curiosity got the best of her and she donned her snorkeling gear and jumped in. Honey guided a large Hawksbill sea turtle toward Cheryl, apparently meant to be used as a plaything for the two of them. She herded the turtle in circles around the boat for half-an-hour, several times bringing it close enough for Cheryl to touch, before she finally tired of the game and let it escape.





We got an idea of the range and speed of dolphins one day when we heard a VHF radio transmission about the friendly dolphin that was playing with swimmers down at Half Moon Cay. Honey was gone from our anchorage and we had no doubt that it was her they were talking about. Later that morning I heard her outside our boat. I checked the time and noted that it had been two hours since she was reported at Half Moon, seventeen miles to the south. If she had left there immediately she’d covered that considerable distance at an average speed of more than eight knots. I have since learned that Bottlenose dolphins have been clocked at more than twice that speed, but it was impressive nevertheless.

Honey was especially active on full moon nights. When the moon started waxing toward full, she would come to the boat repeatedly throughout the night, blowing and jumping, begging us to get into the water and play. Neither of us had much desire to get out of bed and go for a swim at midnight, but Cheryl would sometimes sit in the cockpit and talk to her in the moonlight, which seemed to calm her spirit.

We had taken to spending pleasant afternoons visiting with Phillip, the lighthouse keeper on Sandbore Cay. Phillip’s brother was Minister of Transportation, which may have explained how he had been able to hold onto the light-keeping position for the past sixteen years. He gave us some great history lessons on Belize’s lighthouses and the country in general. Now over seventy years old, he was sharing the minimal responsibilities of maintaining the lighthouse (it was battery operated, solar powered and switched on and off automatically with a photocell) with his childhood friend, Rudolph. They had grown up together as boys when their respective fathers had been lighthouse keepers together in the days when it was a full-time job for two men. He explained that the old lighthouses were fired by “coal oil”. The fifty-gallon containers of kerosene had to be hoisted up to the top of the towers with a block-and-tackle arrangement and soot had to be cleaned from the thick Fresnel lenses at least twice per week. He allowed that it was a lot of work and he could never do it now at his age, but those old lights could be seen for thirty miles, not like these battery operated ones he was keeping now, which he denounced as “pure rubbish”.

Phillip had a sweet setup on the little twelve-acre cay. His wife lived with him in the main house and Rudolph and Rudolph’s nephew lived nearby in two small slat houses. They used their radio to order provisions as needed, which were brought out on the monthly supply boat. They ran several small side ventures including fishing and refining coconut oil from the prolific palm groves on the cay. They bottled the oil in empty rum bottles and sent it back on the supply boat to Belize City where it was distributed and sold to tourists.

We sat in the shade of a palm tree one sunny afternoon, soaking up one of Phillip’s tales while he extracted oil from a heap of coconut pulp by boiling it in a vat over a coconut-husk fire. As we listened and watched the oil refining process a forty-foot powerboat loaded with tourists came through the pass. I asked Phillip if he knew what they were up to.

“Yeah, they gonna swim with that dolphin. They been bringin’ tourists down from San Pedro Town for nigh on a year just to swim with the dolphin. I reckon some people will pay to do just about anything.”

Apparently, word of the wild dolphin that would let you swim with her had spread a lot farther than we had realized. The boat anchored and two-dozen sunburn-red and lily-white tourists wearing rented snorkel gear splashed into the water. The captain leaned back against the railing of the upper bridge and checked his watch. The tourists flailed around in the water for a few minutes, looking around in all directions for the dolphin, which had failed to appear. We lost interest and turned our attention back to Phillip’s stories. Tourists suddenly started squealing and pointing, flailing around and splashing. Honey rushed toward the gaggle of swimmers, but veered away when she got within twenty feet. For the next several minutes she circled the snorkelers but never came anywhere near close enough for any of them to touch her. She didn’t seem to like crowds. About ten minutes after she showed up, the captain looked at his watch again, took out a whistle and blew it loudly.

“Okay, load up,” he bellowed. “You swam with the dolphin, time to go.”

I felt sorry for them. They had not had much of a dolphin swim and the boat ride from San Pedro was a good forty nautical miles. The boat was a displacement hull that would struggle to do much more than ten knots, so they had probably been underway and rolling heavily for four hours just to get here, and now they had to do the trip in reverse. A whole long day spent traveling for ten minutes of swimming near a dolphin. There was no telling what they had been charged for the privilege; the fuel costs alone for such a trip would have been substantial. Maybe Phillip was right, but I figured that it wasn’t so much that some people would pay to do anything as that some people would take your money for whatever scheme they could dream up to sell you.

Honey seemed to be getting more anxious in the following days. Whenever we so much as touched the anchor chain or started up the diesel engine she would go crazy, obviously afraid that we were leaving. One day I took the dinghy out to look at the pass that Ed was afraid to see in order to judge the danger for myself. When Honey saw that I was approaching the exit she went into her noisy leaping, blowing and chattering routine, ripping back and forth in front of me. Only after I had finished my reconnaissance and turned back into the lagoon did she calm down. She swam up beside the motoring dinghy and kept pace with an almost imperceptible movement of her tail, once again putting her pectoral fin over the side for me to hold.

We knew we’d have to leave Lighthouse Reef soon but dreaded it, not least because our dolphin wanted so badly for us to stay. We finally pulled the anchor one day while she was gone, maybe down to Half Moon Cay or maybe just out fishing on the reef. I’ve sometimes wondered if we should have waited for her to return before leaving, but that would have probably just been harder for her, and for us. Maybe it was the best way, but it still felt like a betrayal to just disappear while she wasn’t there, leaving her to discover on her own that she was alone once more. Some will say that she was just an animal, but to us she was a thrilling wild creature—an extraordinary part of nature that we were privileged to know in a way few people ever can. We had a special bond with that intelligent being that we’ll always cherish.

So we just left, because it’s all we could do. Our eyes were misty when we sailed out the pass and I caught Cheryl looking back, like I was, both wanting and not wanting to see her there, but unable not to look.

We heard a few secondhand reports about Honey over the next several years, but then we didn’t hear anything for a long time. When we finally got the chance to question some cruisers who had just returned from Lighthouse Reef they said that as far as they knew there was no dolphin at Sandbore Cay. They had never heard of a dolphin like that and I had the feeling that they really didn’t much believe our story.





Jomo





The lime green Toyota snaked its way south, tracing the twists in the road. Familiar island smells drifted in through the open windows of the chrome-festooned sedan—charcoal smoke, musty earth, the fertile tang of seaside jungle. The looming volcano still shielded the skinny ribbon of blacktop from the sun’s rays and left a hint of last night’s coolness lingering in its shadow. Subwoofers pounded our eardrums with a hammering thump and pierced the stillness of the hillsides and coves, the rumbling American hip hop rhythm shaking the lush foliage that threatened to breach the borders of the highway and reclaim the hard barren strip as part of its own.

Islanders appeared along the roadside now and then, carrying cutlasses for chopping brush or harvesting crops. The thudding bass notes no doubt announced our approach long before we came into view. They waved as we rounded the curves and saluted the man at the wheel with raised fists.

“Big J!” they shouted. “Jomo!”

Our driver reached his arm out the window and returned their greetings with a fist of his own. He turned toward the back seat and flashed a grin, conveying a message that he could never hope to verbalize above the thundering music: ‘See what an important man I am? They love me.’

Jomo and Nathaniel, his main man, who answered to the nickname Helper, had insisted on being our chauffeurs for the day, our tour guides to their island. As we made our steady advance down the west coast—from our stern-to anchorage at Wallilabou Bay, through the villages of Barrouallie, Rutland Vale, Layou, and finally to the hills above Kingstown—I had ample time to reflect on how we’d come to be the guests of these two young men and to consider just how good an idea all this might be.

“Where you takin’ us Jomo?” I yelled.

He dialed down the volume of the blaster. “Where you wan go? You say you need some vegetables, right?”

“We need some tomatoes and cucumbers, maybe some cabbage and carrots, things like that. Potatoes too, and some fruit,” Cheryl read from her mental list. “Can we get some stuff like that?”

“Ah course. I gon take you to da market, best market in Vincent; I gon show you off to some people.”

Show us off? I wasn’t sure but thought what he probably intended was for the locals to see that he had some foreign friends, which, inexplicably, seems to carry some kind of status in the West Indies. That, and the fact that we were his saviors.

As we made our way down the winding hillside road and into the city Jomo swept his arm grandly. “Kingstown, capital ah St. Vincent.”

Kingstown is small, and like most old West Indian towns, a bit down-at-the-heels. It was a beehive of activity this morning, especially along the main business routes, where many of the buildings retain much of their original colonial Caribbean charm, though modern structures encroach relentlessly. Jomo angled the pimpmobile into an empty space alongside one of the busier streets. We followed as he climbed out of the car and did a rolling strut down a covered sidewalk, gold chain, medallion, rings and watch flashing. Helper, decked out in similar fashion, followed behind, as if guarding our rear flank. We walked in the shade of old pastel storefronts with canopies supported by columns splotched with overlapping layers of peeling paint: chalky pinks, greens and blues. Cool, stale air drifted from the open doorways of dim old general stores and variety shops and competed with the heat rising off the street’s black tarmac. The market was up ahead at the end of the block.

Open markets are a fixture of all West Indian towns of size, and Kingstown’s was a fairly good one. Vendors’ tables were laid out in a grid in the sunshine and adorned with produce neatly aligned in rows or assembled in small heaps. Jomo broke out glad-handing and bantering with the sellers and shoppers like a seasoned politician, though he couldn’t have been much more than twenty-five. He was greeted by smiles and handshakes all around. He clearly enjoyed his notoriety.

“Deese my good frens, Randy an Cheryl; dey save our lifes.” Handshakes for us, and thanks for the saving of lives. “Dey rescue we at sea, we would ah been done for cept for dem,” he said. “Treat dem right; give dem da right price, you hear me? You hear me now?”

Jomo suddenly produced a small pocket camera. Handing it to a shriveled old man, he said, “Take ah picture ah we, I wan save a picture ah dem dat save my life. I gon keep it forever.”

Photos were snapped. Quite a few photos in fact, with a varying cast of bystanders, but always including Jomo and us. I began to worry about where they might eventually end up. It’s true that we did look somewhat like tourists—if not like genuine resort guest types, at least like cruising sailors, which is surely a form of tourist. We smiled like happy fools. As we stood posing in the bright tropical sun, the shutter clicking away, I cut my eyes to Cheryl and knew she was thinking the same thing I was: ‘I hope we look like tourists and not like his suppliers.’ Because deep down I was sure that someday, in the mop-up following the inevitable bust, the DEA would be studying these photos, probably with a magnifying glass.

​Jomo had a good reason to be happy today. As an island man he understood intuitively that he would now be living one of the last days of his life, or dead already, but for a stroke of luck and a touch of goodwill. He knew well the potential hazards of putting to sea in a small powerboat if for no other reason than that he had recently lost friends (more probably associates) to the sea, likely in a way similar to how he had almost met his own end. Not that this knowledge had led him to take any particular precautions, an unfortunate approach to seafaring that’s not exactly unheard of in the islands.

Every year, up and down the Lesser Antilles chain, people are lost at sea simply because they head offshore in outboard powered boats in easterly trade winds and west-setting currents, trusting their lives to two-stroke Japanese technology. It almost always works. When it doesn’t they simply don’t show up at their intended destination. Ever. The family traveling north or south to the next island for a visit with relatives or on a shopping run, the smuggler off to deliver or pick up a spot of contraband, the fisherman headed out for his daily work, sometimes just disappear, and everyone knows they won’t be seen again. They may as well have fallen off the edge of the earth, and in a sense, they have.

Jomo knew how lucky he was, but we now understood that we too were lucky in a way; lucky to be allowed a glimpse into the intricacies of a world that we had never really known—the world of the frontline workers in a shadowy industry that nudges many eastern Caribbean economies over the line separating poverty from prosperity. Folk heroes and role models to some, outlaws and a menace to society to others, they were nothing if not colorful, larger-than-life characters. Our lives briefly intersected with theirs because of a simple navigational issue we’d faced on the previous day.





◆◆◆



The distance from the almost landlocked inner harbor of Marigot Bay, St. Lucia, to our next planned anchorage in Wallilabou Bay, St. Vincent was forty-seven nautical miles. We would need daylight on arrival to drop a bow anchor on the steep-to bottom and then swing Caribee around to run a stern line to a palm tree on the beach. There’s no other option when the bottom falls sharply away into the depths like an underwater cliff. Desired arrival time dictates time of departure on a short trip like this, and we’d calculated that if we left at first light and averaged five knots we should have a comfortable cushion of daylight left for anchoring.

We’d had our coffee and all was set to go as the outlines of palm trees, ridge lines and other anchored boats began to materialize out of the predawn gloom. We weighed anchor and slowly motored out of the small, picturesque bay that novelist James Michener once called the most beautiful in the Caribbean. As the hull slipped through calm water in dead still air we began to see obstacles more clearly in the brightening light. We soon cleared the outer harbor and started to feel the slight rise and fall of long ocean swells generated by some distant storm. Details on shore grew increasingly distinct as the sun climbed higher but even with good visibility it was nearly impossible to make out the harbor entrance from seaward. It looked exactly like any other unbroken stretch of shoreline, which explains part of the bay’s history.

Back in the days when European noblemen sailed around the Caribbean taking shots at each other with cannons, Admiral Lord Nelson once hid his entire fleet in the inner harbor of Marigot Bay by lashing palm fronds to the rigging of his ships. French warships sailed down the island chain searching for the British vessels with spyglasses, never suspecting that some of the trees visible in their eyepieces were actually the masts of their adversary’s vessels.

The forecasted winds were light, which meant that in the lee of the St. Lucian mountain range they were non-existent. We motored slowly near shore, southward toward the St. Vincent Channel, the twenty-four-mile stretch of open water that separates the two islands. The electric autopilot steered while we enjoyed a breakfast of crispy bacon, scrambled eggs and buttered toast. We ate in the cockpit and watched the shore slip past two hundred yards to port. Pretty little fishing villages of pastel colored houses were nestled around coves that sat at the bases of steep ravines. They passed in a long procession like floats in a holiday parade. A white church seemed to anchor each town to its hillside. Brightly painted wooden smacks lay in rows along the beach where they’d been dragged from the sea to await being called back into service.

By 0800 we were directly under the sheer face of The Pitons, the Gibraltar of the Caribbean. The soaring twin pikes form the most recognizable and spectacular landmark in the entire island chain. A half-hour after clearing their shadow we were chugging along in the bright sunshine when the reinforced winds that often whip around the ends of the islands started to fill in. The mountain ranges of the Lesser Antilles block the easterly trades, forcing them through the gaps between islands, accelerating wind speeds, sometimes dramatically. The winds were light on this day so we only got a nice sailing breeze out of the deal, not the powerful gusts that are more common. Sails were hoisted, the engine killed and the self-steering vane set up. We sailed away in engine-free silence on a course for the northwest corner of St. Vincent, the green peaks of St. Lucia already shrinking in our wake.

A couple of hours later drowsiness started to get the best of us. Cheryl succumbed first and retreated to her sea berth for a nap while I stood a relaxed watch and read a James Clavell novel between occasional scans of the horizon. On one of those scans I noticed a speck of some kind of flotsam in the southwest distance. I paid it little heed—it was no threat to us after all, probably just a fisherman’s boat—but something about it stuck in the back of my mind. A half-hour later I saw it again. It must have crested a wave just as I looked. On a whim I gave it a look through binoculars. It was yellow and seemed to be vibrating. That was strange.

I fell off a few degrees and sailed closer, approaching at an oblique angle, not wanting to get too far off course. Another half-hour passed; another look through the glasses. This time it was clearly a yellow, quivering object, not normal at all. Sailing farther down from our track to investigate, I had my first thought that it could be someone in distress.

“Cheryl, are you awake?” I called down the companionway.

“I am now.”

“Come look at this. I think it might be somebody adrift.”

She climbed up the companionway steps a few minutes later. I pointed in the direction to look and gave her the glasses.

“What do you make of that?”

She adjusted the focus, struggling to hold the binoculars steady against the rolling of the boat. After a long look she said, “Yep, that’s what it is, people standing on something, waving flags.”

“We gotta go check it out. It has to be a boat, or maybe a liferaft. They’re drifting toward Mexico, or somewhere a long way west of here. How many people does it look like?”

“A lot. I don’t know, maybe a dozen. Looks like they’re all waving flags.”

“If they have to be rescued we’ll need to call somebody to help if we can,” I said. “That’s really too many to take onboard if we have a choice. If they need gas we could give ‘em what we have but it won’t be enough to help much.”

We headed directly for them and could soon see that there were about seven people on a low-profile speedboat, all standing up and waving yellow raincoats. We needed to approach closely enough to ask them what the problem was but were a little leery. Like everyone else, we’d heard stories of boats being hijacked by criminals feigning distress. But this didn’t have the look of a set-up. They were too far from the sailing lanes to have expected anybody to see them, and once we’d gotten close enough for a better look it was obvious that they were genuinely agitated. They kept wildly waving raincoats even after we were close enough to hear them yelling for help. They were young men and they looked a little rough, but the fear mixed with eager hope on their faces belied their appearance. We started the engine and dropped the jib in order to slow our speed and gain some maneuverability. I passed close downwind of them to better hear their voices carried on the breeze without getting too close for comfort.

“What’s wrong?” I shouted. “Are you out of gas?”

A dissonant jumble of voices bounced back as they all bellowed different replies at the same time. We had to get closer if there was to be any communication. I bore away and swung the bow through the wind to make a closer approach. Just as we were coming up to them again, this time maybe seventy feet away, two guys dived overboard and stroked hard for Caribee. Alarmed, I pushed the throttle fully open and started to turn downwind. Too late. Faster than I would have believed possible they were a few strokes off our port side, eyes glued to the low freeboard of our decks. It occurred to me to kick them, or stomp their fingers to keep them off, but that seemed like a mean-spirited thing to do to these obviously terrified swimmers and I just didn’t have it in me. They were afraid that we were going to sail away and leave them adrift again and were seizing what they saw as their best option. Before we had time to consider it further they had pulled themselves aboard, panting as they climbed dripping wet into the cockpit.

“Tank you, tank you, you saved we,” said the first one aboard. He grabbed my hand and shook it vigorously. He reached for Cheryl’s hand and shook it too, as did the second one. They were shabbily dressed, showing none of the bling that would be on display the next day.

“You can pull my boat ta St. Vincent?” he asked.

I looked over at the speedboat and studied it closely for the first time. It was probably thirty-five feet overall, longer than Caribee. Two high-powered outboards were tilted up as if they had been working on them. There were five scruffy-looking guys still aboard the low-slung vessel, all standing and staring intently in our direction. The name Ringleader was painted on her red topsides in large white letters. It would be tough for us to tow this boat for any distance in a seaway, and it might be more than twenty-five miles before we could release her.

“No way,” I said. “She’s too big. Our engine’s too small. I don’t think we have enough fuel, either. Maybe we can call somebody else to tow her.”

“We can try to call the Coast Guard,” Cheryl offered.

“No, no Coast Guard, we no need dem.” He gazed into the distance for a long moment, seemed to consider his options. “Look, I gon level wit you. We made a little run last night, up to Dominica, you know, and we no wan da Coast Guard, know what I mean?”

We thought we did. We didn’t want to press them too much, not sure what their response might be, but we were not going to be calling the Coast Guard. It was unlikely either of the islands’ authorities would have heard the call in any case.

“Okay, okay, no Coast Guard, don’t worry,” I said. “I’ll see if we can raise a bigger yacht to give you a tow.” We were hove to, holding station a couple of hundred yards from the disabled speedboat, far enough to avoid a repeat of the swimmer scenario. I scanned the horizon. Nothing in sight except a distant sail to the north. I had seen it earlier and it looked a little closer now so it must be southbound too.

“Why don’t you put out a VHF call for anybody headed south in the St. Vincent Channel,” I said to Cheryl. Turning back to our uninvited guests, I said, “My name’s Randy. This is Cheryl.”

“I’m Jomo, an dis my man, Helper. I say Helper, real name Nathaniel.”

“Is that your boat?” I asked.

“She all mine, for true. I doan wanna lose she. She can outrun all dem Coast Guard cept da French and da States. Specially da States. Dey call out dem helicopters on you ass. Can’t hide from dem helicopters. She can outrun da Lucians, Dominicans, Antiguans, all ah dem. But we keep a long way off ah dem French islands, I tell you dat, ah long way off.”

Okay, so this guy has a habit of getting into high-speed chases with island authorities, apparently smuggling God-knows-what in a boat with the name Ringleader painted on the side in big letters. He’s clearly not trying to fly below the radar. No matter, the problem now is that we have to find a way to get all these folks home. We can’t just abandon them now that we’re involved, particularly since two of them are actually on our boat.

We waited in the cockpit while Cheryl made several futile calls for any vessel headed south to St. Vincent. We were burning valuable daylight and getting nowhere. The sail on the northern horizon had gotten close enough that the view through binoculars told me it belonged to a catamaran; the twin hulls were just becoming visible above the water.

“Put out a call for the catamaran headed south to St. Vincent,” I said, “and make sure you call it the catamaran.”

Cheryl made the call a few times. No response. We were starting to get discouraged when we heard a reply in French-accented English.

“Theese eese zee catamaran Carriacou sailing south to St. Veencent, go ahead please.”

Our spirits lifted. Maybe we’d found a solution. Cheryl explained our dilemma and asked if they could please tow the disabled powerboat. The captain said that his family was on a two-week charter of a forty-five-foot catamaran. He was unfamiliar with the area and seemed dubious about the prudence of taking Ringleader in tow. He asked lots of questions about what category of boat it was, what they were doing out here anyway (Cheryl ventured fishing?), where they wanted to go, the boat’s name (after consideration she told him she didn’t really know its name), our boat’s name, our flag and hailing port, and everything else he could think of. It occurred to me that any country’s coast guard that might be in radio range could garner most of the information Jomo wanted kept secret from them, but if the same thought occurred to him he didn’t show it.

In the end the temporary captain of the Carriacou consented to tow her, but only if we would sail in tandem alongside them the whole way and only if the powerboat’s crew would agree to pick up a hundred-meter-long towrope, apparently the closest they would consider approaching such a disreputable vessel. My thoughts were running along the lines of, ‘his judgment is obviously a lot better than mine.’

While we waited for the cat to close the distance I asked these two a few questions about their situation.

“Don’t you have a VHF radio?”

“No, we doan have dat,” Jomo answered.

“No type of radio at all?”

“We got ah mobile phone,” Helper volunteered.

“Did you try to call somebody you know for help?”

“Dey ain’t no service out here, mon, dem towers too far off.”

“Do you have any food or water on the boat?”

“We was jus gon be gone one night,” said Jomo, “we din take none ah dat.”

I was starting to get an idea of just how ill prepared they had been and how dire their situation could have quickly become. They had put a lot of trust in internal combustion.

We stood off a few hundred yards as the catamaran approached, surveyed the scene, and made a wide semicircular pass around Ringleader, allowing her ragtag crew to pick up a float tied to the end of the towline and make the line fast to the foredeck. I had half expected them to just sail away when they read the name emblazoned on the side of Jomo’s boat.

We all got underway together in lightening winds. After a few minutes our speed was synchronized at about four-and-a-half knots, with the impromptu tug-and-tow running about a quarter-mile off our starboard side. We would be cutting it close but we might yet make Wallilabou before dark. We motor-sailed slowly southward hour after hour, the monotonous drone of the diesel and the warming sunshine making us all a little drowsy, especially after Cheryl served up a tasty lunch of ham, beans, rice, and sliced, vine-ripened tomatoes from the Castries market. As morning gave way to afternoon, La Soufrière gradually grew more imposing off our port bow, its smoldering crater veiled in clouds. The four-thousand-foot-high active volcano utterly dominates the northern end of St. Vincent. Actually, it comprises that part of the island. It last erupted in 1979 and will undoubtedly do so again some day. The massive eruption of May 7, 1902, which occurred just hours before the infamous eruption of Mount Pelée on Martinique, killed almost seventeen hundred people, and that was when the population was a lot lower than it is today. The power of La Soufrière is not to be lightly dismissed but it looked docile enough today.

Jomo and Helper became more animated as they neared home. Emerging from their post-lunch lethargy, they regaled us with the details and stories of their lives—brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, friends and girlfriends, the hardships of eking out a living on a small rock in a vast sea, the virtual necessity of turning to contraband smuggling for survival, their dreams of retiring as rich men in Palm Beach. They spoke of their home island with pride, cataloging the many virtues of St. Vincent, and soon segued into details of the ganja trade. They claimed their island grew the world’s best marijuana.

“See all dem lil houses on da side ah da volcano,” Jomo said, “dem all farmers. Dat ground da best for ganja; plenty rain up dare too.”

I scanned the slope of the verdant mountain through binoculars, noticing for the first time how many little shacks were scattered around, peeking out of the dense bush. They were hard to see with the naked eye even after you knew where to look, partly because there were no roads cut into the steep mountainside to give them away.

“How do they get back and forth from all the way up there, just climb up and down?” I asked.

“Ah course dem climb, mon. Dey ain’t no roads up dare, jus some paths is all” said Helper. “Dey doan come down much, jus stay up dare an grow da weed, maybe come down tah buy some food, but is hard tah carry back up. Dey jus make do up dare is all.”

“Does the government try to catch them?” Cheryl asked.

“No mon, ah course not, dat bad for da people. Dat all we got on Vincent. Jus da Americans is all dat really try,” said Helper.

“What do you mean, the Americans go up there to stop them, here in St. Vincent?”

“Ever year. Jus before harvest, dey bring in dem helicopters and police and dem, chop all da ganja. Dey must pay da gov’ment tah let ‘em come in I tink. Da Vincent police help too,” Jomo explained.

“I guess that makes it hard on the farmers, huh?”

“No mon, everybody know dem comin’. Jus harvest ah week or two early is all, leave ah few plants for da police, so dem Americans happy,” said Helper, grinning widely.

“The police must know the farmers are harvesting the plants before the raids start,” Cheryl said.

“Ah course. Dey say dey give dem farmers da word, so dey can get da crop in on time,” Jomo said. “Dem police ain’t stupid. I doan know about da Americans, maybe dey jus doan care. Maybe dey jus wan it tah look like dey doin’ somethin’.”

The St. Vincent ganja production system in a nutshell. I couldn’t say that any of this was particularly surprising after having spent years in the Caribbean observing apathetic law enforcement efforts on many fronts, not just against drugs. Does anybody really believe regional governments are seriously trying to stop marijuana trafficking? The U.S. government’s approach to the challenge is equally ineffective and just as predictable. Coerce or entice the government of a small country into engaging in a “joint operation” to stamp out the illegal drug trade, an operation yielding approximately zero benefit at substantial cost, which is borne solely by the American taxpayer. Then claim a tactical win in the War on Drugs (first declared by Richard Nixon in 1971 and still on the brink of glorious victory) and go home until next year.

“Where you guys want us to drop you and the boat?” I asked, “we need to make Wallilabou before dark if we can.”

“Drop we at Chateaubelair, we got plenty friends up dare, den you can go on,” said Jomo.

Chateaubelair was the northernmost true harbor, and only about an hour north of our destination. We gave a call to the French captain of the Carriacou and advised him of the plan. He sounded relieved to be finished with this whole business and the sooner the better. As we approached the bay Jomo and Helper stood up and started waving both arms at a couple of small milling powerboats crewed by the ubiquitous “boat boys” who ply St. Vincent’s western coast in hopes of selling some goods or services, or promoting some questionable scheme designed to relieve passing yacht crews of a little cash. When they recognized our passengers everybody erupted into a chattering West Indian patois that was totally unintelligible to us. They took our passengers aboard and at Jomo’s instruction started throwing ripe mangoes to us.

“We gon see you in da mornin’ at Wallilabou, take you on ah island tour,” shouted Jomo over the roar of the outboard as the launch sped away toward Ringleader.

“I doubt if we ever see them again,” Cheryl said.

“I don’t think so either. They’re just happy to be home. They’re really okay, just ordinary young guys trying to get ahead. I don’t really want to be associated with them though. I hope they don’t show up tomorrow.”

“I don't think we have to worry about it but even if they do I’m glad we rescued them. I don’t think that catamaran captain would have stopped even if he had seen them. And we learned a lot that we would never have found out about any other way. Looks like we can still make it to Wallilabou too, with a little daylight to spare. What a day.”





◆◆◆



They did show up of course, as promised. The morning tranquility was shattered by an insistent knocking on our hull just as we were finishing our first cup of coffee after a restful night at anchor, stern tied to a palm on the beach.

“I think it’s boat boys,” Cheryl said.

“Let’s just stay below. If we act like we’re still asleep they’ll go away. They’re probably trying to sell mangoes.”

Rap rap rap rap knock knock knock Wham Bam!

“What the hell,” I said, “these guys just won’t quit. I’ll go tell ‘em we don’t need any.”

I slid the companionway hatch open and was met by a bushy-headed West Indian guy wearing a hole-pocked T-shirt, straddling a floating plank of wood and hanging onto our caprail. He returned my inquiring expression with an impassive countenance.

“Your frens wanna see you,” he said.

“What?”

He pointed toward shore while holding my gaze, still wearing the deadpan look. I rubbed the sleep from my eyes and focused on the beach. Sure enough, there stood Jomo and Helper, their appearance transformed by shiny clothes and heavy gold chains that supported large gold medallions. They grinned and waved, motioning for us to come ashore.

“Give us ten minutes,” I shouted.

I went below and relayed the news to Cheryl. A few minutes later we were standing on the beach, ready to start our VIP tour of St. Vincent, courtesy of the Godfather of Chateaubelair. We made a quick stop at the Customs and Immigration office at the provisional port of entry that had recently been set up at Wallilabou solely to serve visiting yachts. Unsurprisingly, it was closed. A note pinned to the door advised us to proceed to Bequia for entry formalities.





◆◆◆



Two hours later we were loading bags of fresh produce from the Kingstown market into the trunk of Jomo's Toyota. The quality was excellent, the price much better than we would find at the tourist-oriented Rasta market in Bequia, our next opportunity to provision.

“Me an Helper got ah special surprise fo you,” said Jomo. “We gon take you tah see somethin’ you gon like.”

“We need to get back before too long Jomo, we gotta get on down to Bequia and check in with Customs and Immigration,” I said. “They get kind of bent out of shape if they find out you didn’t check in right away.”

“No problem, mon. Jus tell dem you know Jomo, dey respec me. You my frens now. My frens no have no problem wit da police and dem.”

We were a little apprehensive about what the surprise might be, but figured it was best to play along and hope for the best. Jomo guided the car up winding lanes, gaining altitude and moving eastward while we waited for our destination to be revealed. The mystery was solved when we turned off the Leeward Highway and into the entrance of St. Vincent Botanical Gardens. We were indeed surprised, and delighted. Visiting the Gardens had been on our “to do list” for some time. Founded in 1765, it’s the second oldest in the Western Hemisphere and thought to be the oldest in the tropical world. There’s a lot of history here, most famously a third-generation breadfruit tree descended from one of the original plants carried to the West Indies by Captain William Bligh of Bounty fame.

The grounds cover an area of twenty acres. Dozens of species of trees and plants, including nutmeg, vanilla, hibiscus, bougainvillea, oleander, lilies, croton, heliconia, ginger, cinnamon, and examples of just about any other tropical plant imaginable are represented. The whole area is lovely. Exotic fragrances overwhelmed our senses at every turn. We thoroughly enjoyed our hour spent wandering the serene gardens and could have happily stayed longer if we’d had more time. It was a nice gesture. The pride of our hosts in this national treasure was evident.

When we arrived back in Wallilabou Bay it was too late in the day to launch a trip to Bequia so we decided to wait until morning when we could get an early start. The officials would just have to wait. We figured what they didn’t know wouldn’t hurt us. We had no plans to play the Jomo card with authorities in any case, not sure their reaction would be as benign as promised.

We thanked Jomo and Helper warmly and told them we’d probably see them out on the water somewhere.

“I gonna mark dat boat ah yours. If I see you out dare, we have ah party on da water,” said Jomo. “I tank you again for stoppin’. I know we lucky you come along, you good people. Not all ah dem yachts would ah stopped fo we, I know dat.”

We stood on the side of the road waving as they drove away, then walked down the hill, dragged our dinghy across the sand to the water’s edge and rowed home.





Don’t Drown the Tourist that Feeds You





The best job I ever had was as first mate on a snorkel boat in the United States Virgin Islands. It wasn’t a well-paying job unless you thought of it strictly in hourly terms, but it did have perks. I always wore my bathing suit to work for one thing, making every workday a kind of extreme casual Friday. My place of employment was only fifty feet from home, which is to say fifty feet from Caribee’s anchorage in Cruz Bay, St. John. I could swim to work if I wanted. The job site was a powerboat, a distinctive bright red forty-foot fiberglass trawler named Sadie Sea. The captain, and my boss, was Sandy, an attractive, longhaired blonde with an athletic build and a knack for charming the tourists she ferried out to the local reefs.

A typical workday started with me boarding Sadie Sea around nine-thirty in the morning and performing a few pre-trip checks of the mechanical and electrical systems before Sandy fired up the old Detroit diesel. After the engine had warmed up I would cast off the mooring line and we’d idle to the dock at the Virgin Islands National Park Visitor Center at the head of Cruz Bay, where we’d pick up the tourists who had signed up for a snorkel tour. We did mostly half-day trips, but occasionally we would do a full day, round-island tour. We averaged a half-dozen passengers, but the boat was rated by the Coast Guard for thirty-seven and we sometimes took larger groups. After a short orientation talk we would head out to the reefs, usually along the north shore of St. John, but sometimes at off-lying islands like Lovango Cay, a cute little island whose waters teemed with ornamental reef fish. I would stand at the bow, look down into the clear water, direct Captain Sandy to a clear patch of sand between coral heads and then drop the anchor. Then it was time for the fun part.

My job was to swim among the tourists and point out and identify fish and life forms that most of them didn’t know about and probably wouldn’t even see if left to fend for themselves. Having spent the past four years more-or-less permanently diving for fun and dinner on Caribbean reefs I knew all the fish, creatures and corals by their common names. I had also become fairly accomplished at free diving and could easily dive to forty feet or more by holding my breath. This never ceased to amaze the tourists. Most of them could barely snorkel at the surface without gagging and strangling on seawater every few minutes. I knew my skills were just average for someone who spent a lot of time in the water, but most of the tourists considered me to be an aquatic athlete and fish expert. I was having a blast, being paid to do what I would be doing anyway if I could, except that I wasn’t allowed to spear fish or catch lobster for the grill. I remember gliding along the sandy bottom of a coral canyon one sunny morning, barely moving my swim fins to conserve my lungful of air. Brilliant angelfish, rock beauties and sergeant majors darted in and out of the coral crevasses that scarred the faces of the canyon’s walls. A fat green moray poked his head out from under a rock, opened his mouth wide and flashed rows of razor-sharp teeth at me. I rolled over on my back, looked up at the backlit snorkelers watching from the surface and thought, ‘I can’t believe I actually get paid to do this.’

Sandy didn’t just do snorkel trips. She also had the National Park Service contract for the Reef Bay Hike pickup. Two afternoons per week the Park Service led a guided tour down Reef Bay Trail on the steep south slope of St. John. The hike was about three miles, all downhill, starting at the trailhead on the highway where hikers were dropped by taxis and ending at the beach at Reef Bay where we picked them up and took them back to town. It was a popular tour. In addition to the attraction of being a downhill hike, the trail passed through a scenic, arid section of wilderness and featured visits to the famous petroglyphs and the historic ruins of a sugar mill near Reef Bay. The icing on the cake was a nice boat ride along the south shore of St. John on the way back. It was usually subscribed to the maximum—the thirty-seven-passenger capacity of Sadie Sea.

One afternoon we were scheduled to make a Reef Bay pickup shortly after the end of an unusually strong three-day blow out of the south. Even though the wind had dropped back to normal trade wind strength and backed to the east, it was clear from the swell working into Cruz Bay that the seas were still running fairly high out of the south. I thought Sandy might call the Park Service and cancel the trip since Reef Bay is exposed to the full brunt of any southerly swells, but when I went aboard it looked like she was preparing to go.

“Do you think it’ll be very rough over at the beach?” I asked.

“I thought about that, but I’m pretty sure it’ll be okay,” she said. “I’ve done the pickup after stronger winds than those, and the wind switched back to the east yesterday anyway, so it shouldn’t be too rough after this much time.”

“Well, there’s still quite a bit of swell working into the bay here,” I said, “and it’s not really open to the south. I’ve never seen Reef Bay in a southerly swell but it seems like it could get kind of gnarly.”

“Well, I guess we could take a ride over to Chocolate Hole and see how it looks there,” she said. “The hikers won’t be let out at the trailhead for almost an hour. We’ll have time to cancel if it looks nasty.”

“You want to?”

She considered it. “I don’t think we really need to, do you?”

“Nah, I doubt it. It’s been out of the east for a whole day, like you say. The hikers might get a little wet at the beach, but that never hurt anybody.”

“I think it’ll be okay,” she said. “We’ll be careful.”

After the standard pre-trip chores were finished I tossed the mooring pennant into the water and Sandy swung the bow around to the west and powered out of the bay, past the entrance markers and into Pillsbury Sound. As we cleared the reef the lazy southerly swell lifted and lowered the boat beneath our feet like a slow-motion elevator changing directions. We soon rounded the southwest corner of St. John and pointed eastward, passing just offshore of the headlands separating Great Cruz Bay, Chocolate Hole and Rendezvous Bay. I watched Sandy at the helm from the corner of my eye. There was a grim set to her jaw as she surveyed the long swells slamming against the rocks and piling up on the beaches. I thought I knew what she was thinking but it was too late for second thoughts now—the hikers were no doubt already descending the mountain, bound for the beach.

As we approached the Reef Bay mooring the swell grew steeper in the shoaling water but was only breaking near the beach. I picked up the mooring pennant with a boathook and secured it to the bow cleat. Surprisingly, there was still a substantial southerly component to the wind, no doubt partially caused by a land effect. The wind was light but southerly, so the bow pointed into the swell.

“Well, what do you think?” Sandy asked.

“It’s better than I was afraid it might be. I doubt we’ll have much trouble at Sadie but getting them loaded at the beach might be a little tricky.” I studied the breakers crashing onto the narrow strip of sand. I tried to envision loading six of our typical doughy, rubber-legged tourists into the big rigid-bottomed inflatable and escaping the surf without hanging the outboard’s prop on the sandy bottom. “Should be doable if I time it right.”

“It’ll be easy enough if you watch for big waves and the hikers aren’t too old or out of shape.”

“You know they will be, at least some of them.”

“I know you can do it. Be positive. And be careful.”

Just then a wave much bigger than the rest raised the bow sharply and slammed it back down into the following trough.

“Whoa, didn’t see that coming,” Sandy said.

“We’d better keep a close eye on that.”

A second big wave quickly followed, lifting the bow, plunging it back down and kicking the stern up as it passed under the hull. Observing the pattern, we noticed that the bigger wave trains came every two minutes or so, with relatively calm periods in between. Maybe I could time the pickup to fit the cycle.

The early arrivals soon started to dot the beach. A few more minutes and there were fifteen or twenty people milling around. The park rangers always tell hikers to bring swimwear in case they want to cool off before being picked up, but nobody seemed to want to brave the waves today. Sandy told me to go ahead and pick up a load. As captain, she was supposed to remain aboard, so I would be heading in alone. I threw seven life jackets into the dinghy, one for me and six for the passengers, seven being the capacity of the inflatable. I climbed in, pulled the starter cord on the Yamaha twenty-five and headed for the beach some seventy-five yards off our stern.

I hopped out when I reached waist-deep water and stabilized the dinghy, not willing to chance getting closer in the breaking waves. I looked out to sea to make sure no big swells were approaching. It looked clear.

“Okay, it’s a little rough today so you’re going to have to wade out a little way to get in,” I shouted. “I need six people.” I threw the life jackets up on the beach and waited for them to wade out. Nobody moved. “Okay, I need some passengers, it’s the only way to get home unless you want to walk back up the mountain. Who’s ready to go?”

Two men donned life jackets, waded out and rolled themselves over the inflatable tubes and into the boat. Two couples reluctantly followed. Once they were loaded and settled I pushed the dinghy out until I was standing in chest-deep water and pulled myself in over the big tube. I snapped the idling outboard into reverse and gunned the motor, trying to get into deeper water before a big wave caught us. We made it away from the danger zone and I relaxed a bit. It looked like this might go okay.

As I approached Sadie Sea I pulled up to the swim platform at the stern. The platform sits about three inches above the water in calm conditions, but now it was alternately rising above the surface and plunging under by a few inches as the boat bucked lightly in the swell. I tried to bring the inflatable dinghy alongside the platform without getting too close, so that the passengers could step onto its moving surface without it hitting the dinghy, or worse, catching somebody’s ankle between the dinghy and the platform. Thinking that I had the position about right, I was about to tell them to step out when a big swell plunged the swim platform a foot or more under the water. The swell must have pushed Sadie aft at the same time because the platform was driven halfway under the dinghy. That’s the last thing I remember before my head was underwater. The swim platform had pitched up under the dinghy as Sadie’s bow plunged down into a trough. The big inflatable was instantly flipped vertical like a toy, throwing all the passengers and me into the sea along with all of our assorted gear. I must have reflexively sucked in a gulp of air just before my head went under. I popped up beside the dinghy into a chaotic scene of screaming tourists and floating debris—backpacks, shoes, hollow aluminum oars, my life jacket, the half-full gas can still attached to the outboard by it’s umbilical fuel line. I scanned the wild-eyed bunch of frantic, squealing passengers, trying to assess the damage and figure out what to do. I counted six. At least nobody had drowned. Yet. They were all screaming different things at once, flailing in the water, gasping, coughing and gagging.

“I lost my glasses.”

“Where’s my backpack? My camera is in there.”

“I can’t swim, help me!”

“Everybody just swim toward the ladder, right here,” I shouted. “Just get out of the water and we’ll get your stuff for you. If you can’t swim the life jacket will float you and I’ll pull you to the boat. Just keep your head up. Hold your breath if a wave comes over you.”

We finally got all six up the ladder, some being pulled by Sandy and pushed from behind by me. I tied the dinghy to Sadie, then climbed into it and pulled the gas tank back in by its hose. I jumped back into the water and collected any floating gear that I could find. I told Sandy to give me a dive mask, snorkel and fins. I started diving to the bottom ten feet below, looking for the man’s glasses and anything else I could find. I dived to the bottom again and again, scanning as I spread out the search in expanding concentric circles. I found three hiking shoes and a couple of other items, I don’t remember what they were, but the glasses were nowhere to be seen in the turbulence-clouded water. Finally, I gave up looking. I climbed up the ladder onto Sadie, where Sandy was comforting the passengers. A couple of them seemed to be badly shaken. I sat down on the rail and caught my breath for a minute.

“What now, Captain?”

“Well, I guess we have to get the rest of them, don’t we. This time bring the dinghy alongside instead of to the platform and I’ll get some of these guys to help me pull them up over the gunwale.”

“I don’t even know if the outboard will start. It just died on its own when we went over. I think it got dunked, at least partly.”

“Well, I guess you better try it and see,” she said. “I doubt if they can all walk back up the mountain.”

I climbed back into the inflatable, flipped the choke on and gave the cord hard a yank. Amazingly, it started on the first pull. It might be running now but would need a good freshwater rinse at a minimum when we got back to the harbor. I looked at the beach. All the remaining hikers and the park ranger were standing and staring at us. It felt like just minutes since we had gone in the drink but I realized they must have been watching the debacle unfold for half-an-hour. I untied the dinghy from Sadie and snapped the shifter into forward gear.

“Remember the part about being careful,” Sandy said.

I nodded, took a deep breath and headed toward the beach again. I jumped into the surf and held the inflatable in deep water. The remaining hikers looked at me like I was the hangman come to lead them up the gallows steps.

“Okay, I need six more,” I shouted, trying a smile. They all, every last one of them, stood mute and staring. Nobody moved to step forward. Some of them were involuntarily shaking their heads, no. A few backed away as if I might lunge from the water and grab them. “Really, I know it looks rough but we’re going to do it a different way this time. It’ll be okay. Anyway, it’s the only way to get home unless you walk back up the mountain. Are you ready for that? It’s long and steep.”

More stares. I looked at the park ranger and shrugged. He shrugged back.

“Please?” I implored. “Somebody go first. We can’t just leave everybody here on the beach.”

The park ranger started cajoling them to get in, telling them he would go now himself but was required to board last. Finally, a young couple waded out and pulled themselves over the inflatable tubes. Then another person came, and another, and soon we had a load.

I escaped the breakers at the beach again and this time approached Sadie along her port side. It did make more sense to do it this way, I could see that now; the center of the boat was merely rocking back and forth, not plunging in the swells like the bow and stern sections. Sandy directed two of the guys already aboard to lend a hand pulling the passengers out of the dinghy and over the side. The more agile ones climbed up with little trouble. When they had all disembarked I headed back to the beach for another load.

Seeing a successful transfer had apparently emboldened some of the fence straddlers. In the end I convinced two more full loads and half of another to board the dinghy and run the gauntlet. We got them aboard Sadie without much excitement using the new approach, but the remaining nine steadfastly refused to leave the beach. I stood in the surf and waited them out. It was starting to get late in the afternoon. The ranger reminded them of how steep the mountain they had just descended was and how hard it would be to climb it. He told them it might well be dark before they reached the highway. They finally relented and at last Sadie had a full load. I was exhausted, mostly from stress.

There was plenty of fallout from the incident, including an investigation. A Park Service official questioned us separately about the particulars, taking copious notes. That didn’t happen for a couple of weeks, so we had plenty of time to get our stories straight. Getting it straight didn’t involve lying (there had been a ranger on the scene, after all), just downplaying the warning signs and rationalizing the decision not to call off the hike. Spin, I guess you’d call it. I was anxious to help Sandy avoid any repercussions because she was my friend as well as my boss. And in truth the accident had been mostly my fault because I’d not only agreed that it was reasonable to go but had also taken the first load of passengers to the swim platform instead of pulling alongside Sadie as I should have known to do. The investigator didn’t seem to have much of a thirst for blood and I thought he took it fairly easy on us. I got the feeling that the officials were just going through the motions in order to get a record of the incident down on paper. The upshot was a suspension of the hike for several weeks, which cost Sandy quite a bit of revenue and me a fair bit of pay. I think she may have also paid for a pair of eyeglasses and a couple of cameras. Time passed and everything eventually went back to normal the way things tend to do in the islands.

When we sailed back up to the Virgins from Venezuela the next year I got a different gig. It paid a lot better but wasn’t nearly as much fun, though it did turn out to be quite an experience in its own right. I became a carpenter working at a luxury villa on the private island of Little Saint James, later nicknamed Pedif Isle by local islanders. If that rings a bell it’s probably because of news headlines reporting on the island as one of the notorious lairs of purported billionaire money manager and infamous sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. My time on Pedif Isle was during the freewheeling, pre-indictment days when Epstein’s associates included some of the world’s most powerful and famous men, but alas, all of us lowly workers had to make sure and stay well out of sight anytime anyone important visited the island.

In all, we spent five consecutive winters in St. John during the second half of the nineties, always finding work easily because we possessed one key attribute seemingly lacking in most of the VI work force—we actually showed up for work on a regular basis. Word gets around on a small rock. The island was a terrific place to top up the cruising kitty while living aboard at anchor. In the summers we’d sail south to avoid the powerful hurricanes that are the bane of the northeastern Caribbean and in November we would sail north again to go back to work. We became quasi-domesticated once more, even buying a secondhand four-wheel-drive Suzuki Samurai hardtop to get around on the mountainous terrain. We temporarily rediscovered the delights of dirt dwelling during a couple of stints as house sitters for vacationing homeowners. Though we both had various jobs during those years, I never had another one that matched my days as mate on that bright red trawler for sheer enjoyment, notwithstanding the occasional debacle. To enjoy your work is a good thing.





The White House and the Cat Woman





After finishing up our last season of feeding the kitty in the Virgins we decided that we wanted to take the money we’d saved and use it to see somewhere beyond the Caribbean. All of our actual cruising (as opposed to just living aboard while working) for the past five years had been done during hurricane season down in the Windward Islands, or in Venezuela. The southern islands were mostly out of the hurricane belt, or at least that’s what everybody thought, before Ivan, and Venezuela was well outside the danger zone. Back then the Venezuelan criminals didn’t murder people so much. They did steal dinghies and outboards from time to time if you gave them half a chance, and very rarely they might even rob you at gunpoint if you went to the wrong place, but it was nothing like it is nowadays, and the actual murder of foreign visitors was almost unheard of, not to say that murder in general was particularly unusual. It’s a whole different ballgame now. Venezuela has turned into an utterly lawless hellhole and almost nobody sails there anymore. It used to be one of our favorite places though, especially the offshore islands. We went three times over the years and never had the slightest problem. The reports got noticeably worse each year however, and the last time we sailed down that coast we stayed fifty miles offshore and ran without lights at night. That’s how bad piracy had gotten. But the crime problem didn’t extend to the islands of the Eastern Caribbean, for the most part. All the little EC island nations were lovely and welcoming and nobody should have had call to complain about them. Nevertheless, we’d seen them all, even spent months at a time in some, and were ready for a change.

The two most obvious choices of new cruising grounds were Europe and the South Pacific. Reaching either involved an ocean crossing, and since we have a strong affinity for downwind passages in the trades, the Pacific was the clear winner. I’d always been drawn by the allure of the South Seas—the most exotic of all cruising locales, to my mind—and since neither of us likes cold weather, that essentially ruled out Europe except maybe on a seasonal basis. Of course going to the Pacific meant we would have to transit the Panama Canal, about which I had mixed emotions. Mainly I didn’t much like the idea, having heard horror stories over the years about yachts being crushed like eggshells in the locks after big ships smacked them against the concrete lock walls, and similar unhappy events. But we decided that that (the canal transit) was just part of the deal and we would take it as it came. After all, at least dozens of boats made the transit each year without incident.

Before we could consider a voyage to such a faraway destination we needed to do a refit and make some upgrades to Caribee. As it turned out, we were none too soon on the refit, since our old Volvo diesel gave up the ghost in Bequia and refused to start at all until I took a friend’s advise and poured a liter of STP into the crankcase. That worked, barely, and we had power enough to motor to the travel lift slip. I wish I’d heard of the STP fix sooner because we spent three months engineless in the Caribbean islands before coaxing the Volvo back to life. Maybe that was a good thing though, because our close-quarters sailing skills improved considerably during that period of wind-only propulsion.

When it came to doing a major refit in the Caribbean, the go to, hands down best place to do it was, and I suspect still is, Trinidad. Trinidad boasted several competitive haulout yards in the Chaguaramas area, and the country was big enough to have an industrial base that could support a fairly wide spectrum of yacht repair goods and services. There were welders, mechanics, woodworkers, painters, riggers, fiberglass workers, canvass shops and sail lofts, among others. There were also a few well-stocked chandleries and most anything could be imported easily if need be. They grew teak on a commercial basis in the backcountry. The overall cost of living was lower than any other country in the Eastern Caribbean and the exchange rate was favorable. The government was at least moderately yacht friendly and the culture was rich and vibrant. All in all it was a hard combination to beat. We chose the Powerboats yard as best suited for our refit needs and limped to the lift slip powered by what remained of our smoking, thirty-five-year-old Volvo in early January 2002, just a few months after a band of religious fanatics flew some hijacked airliners into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, changing the world forever.

I had estimated that the whole project might consume six months, maybe more, so we wanted to find a prime spot in the yard, as this would be our home for a while. We stumbled onto a deal that we couldn’t pass up. A Finnish couple were just completing a big refit on their own boat, named Irene, and had a “building” for sale that would be a perfect fit for Caribee. That’s how we met Tapio and Eeva, who became good friends with whom we sailed and enjoyed many nice times in the months and years following. Their building was somewhat haphazardly constructed of rough-cut lumber covered with heavy, white plastic sheeting of the type used for shrink-wrapping equipment that is to be left out in the weather. It was something of a stretch to call it a building, but it kept out the rain and the sun and was long enough and wide enough to allow us plenty of room to walk around the boat, and tall enough to allow standing head room on deck under the rafters. We had to pull the mast to get the boat inside of course. Tapio said that the plastic sheathing was approaching the end of it’s specified lifespan but it still looked like it had a few more months left in it, and he would make us an excellent price.

“The guarantee on the plastic has expired, but it still looks good. I think it should last six months or more, what do you think,” Tapio said. I allowed that it did indeed look okay and most likely had enough life left for our purposes.

“Everybody calls it the White House,” Eeva said, “so you can be the new president and first lady. Just say there has been an election and you won.”





We sealed the deal and the next day moved Caribee and ourselves into the White House. We started work straight away, thinking to get the whole project completed as quickly as possible and minimize the cost of lay days in the yard. The first order of business was to address the gelcoat blisters on Caribee’s bottom. She’d had two lifetime blister repair jobs done already and this was to be her third, and I was determined, final one. My plan was to peel about three millimeters off of the underwater surface and replace the lost material with biaxial fiberglass cloth set in epoxy resin, creating a laminate that would be impenetrable by water and thus immune to osmotic blistering in the future. We hired Powerboats to do the peeling with their specialized gelcoat peeling machine.

Once the peeling was finished we had to wait for the laminate to dry, which we expected to take several weeks, at least. Twice per week I had the drying laminate cleaned with a steam pressure washer to clear away the styrene residue that’s left behind when fiberglass dries. While waiting, we started work on our other projects. We knew we would be replacing the engine, but there were many other items of gear we wanted to add and quite a few repairs and upgrades needed. We were in the best place we’d likely be for a long time (for doing boat work) so rationalized that we should now do anything that might conceivably need doing anytime in the near future. With this logic in play the to-do list quickly expanded until it had spiraled utterly out of control.

Part of the problem was that when we got one project finished it looked so good that it made everything else next to it look old and dowdy, so we would do just a little bit more, which led to the same problem again—a vicious cycle. About the time that it was starting to sink in what we had gotten ourselves into, we did a moisture measurement on the drying hull and found it was still way too wet. It would require a second peeling, meaning more drying time, and then we would have to put even more fiberglass and epoxy on to replace the extra material removed. The whole project seemed to be directing us, not the other way around.

We took stock of our situation and decided that the only real choice was to stay the course and follow through. So we made the best of things and tried to enjoy the situation and make our lives as full as possible in a less than optimal situation. We bought a window air conditioning unit and built a plenum of plywood to fit the center hatch so that the whole boat was cool and arid in the sultry Trinidadian climate. This was a dramatic improvement in comfort but meant that we spent more time chilling under the AC and somewhat less time doing boat work. We rigged our television with an antenna in order to receive local broadcasts. We built a sturdy staircase of pine to replace the steep pipe ladder we had been obliged to climb dozens of times per day. I built a large lockable plywood toolbox so that I could leave my tools, projects, supplies and chemicals down below at night instead of carrying everything up and down at the start and end of every workday, a great time saver. I built a workbench and fitted it with a vice. All in all it was quite comfortable and convenient, at least as much as is possible on the hardstand, which essentially amounts to living on a boat propped up in the middle of a dry field and surrounded by a lot of other boats.

We determined to reward ourselves with breaks from work whenever we could justify them and even when we really couldn’t. We bought mountain bikes and took long rides into the hills north of Chaguaramas on Sunday mornings when the weather was fine. The hills in the area are laced with old World War II era roads and bunkers built by the United States military. Most of them are in good condition, some of the roads are paved, and it’s all good fun to explore. We would sometimes ride the six miles out to Macqueripe Beach on alternate Sundays or whenever the urge to get away struck us. The jungle rides were always good for bird and wildlife sightings. Howler monkeys hiding in the forest canopy roared like lions whenever we unknowingly rode under their lairs, sounding like much bigger animals than they really are. They never failed to startle us, no matter how many times it happened.

We rode maxi-taxis (mini-bus route taxis) into Port of Spain on weekday trips, ostensibly to buy some bit of boat hardware or supplies, but often as not it ended up being at least partly a pleasure trip and frequently included a double feature at the cinema before the day was done. There were also longer breaks from the boatyard compound: an overnight bus trip to watch the giant leatherback turtles lay their eggs on a northern beach, a weekend at the famous Asa Wright Nature Centre for world class bird watching. All of these distractions extended the length of our refit by some unknown amount of time, but it turned what might have otherwise been a long stretch of drudgery into something much more enjoyable.

Sometime during the first year of our haulout—yes, the first year—Cheryl became the Cat Woman of Chaguaramas. It started innocently enough. The owner of a woodworking shop inside the Powerboats yard, Neville Boos, knew that she was an animal lover and asked if she could help him out with a cat situation. It seemed that a local female boatyard cat had been living under the boat of some cruisers who had just splashed after a long refit. They’d been feeding the cat and just before they launched the cat had a litter of kittens. Neville asked if Cheryl would help out by feeding and checking on them when he was away from the yard, just until they could find a home or figure out what to do with them. Of course it wasn’t long before the cat family was living under our boat and we were feeding them full time. Word got around, and people starting asking for help with other abandoned or abused animals. The gentlemanly old security guard who manned the front gate of Powerboats, Mr. Green, came to Cheryl one day carrying a pathetic, cowering, scruffy little puppy that had been rescued from some teenage boys who were trying to stone it to death. Cheryl took it for the night and got on the radio the next morning at the end of the local VHF net to ask if any of the cruisers would be interested in adopting a cute little puppy in need of a new home. It worked, and the puppy became somebody’s new boat dog. Soon, more animals, mostly stray cats, found their way under the roof of the White House. Cheryl’s radio announcements became a morning staple of the airwaves. A few other cruisers started to help out, and people donated cat food or money. A local vet started volunteering his time to spay or neuter animals or to treat them for free. Once per month he would set up an exam/treatment/operating table on top of my big plywood toolbox and for a few hours the White House was transformed into a veterinary clinic. Anytime there was a question about what to do about any sort of animal problem the recommendation was: Go ask the cat woman.

Cats and dogs came and went from the White House, but most of the original cat family became more or less our cats, or more accurately Cheryl’s cats, and lived under and around Caribee. Cheryl gave them all very original names. The mother cat was Momma. The remaining kittens were Gray Baby, Boy, and Blackey Whitey. They often followed Cheryl around the yard in a pack, very un-catlike behavior, which never failed to draw comments from onlookers. They would even try to follow her into the shower in the afternoon, turning back only when the water started running. The little clowder would trail her to the front gate of the yard on Saturday mornings, from where she would catch the early maxi taxi to the open market, and when she returned, always with a kilo of fresh “small fry” fish, they would be waiting. Saturday morning was the highlight of the week for the cats.

You can’t be in Trinidad for an extended time and not do Carnival at least once. It just wouldn’t be right. Trinis live and breathe Carnival. The Port of Spain celebrations are touted as the world’s second largest, behind only the massive festivals of Rio de Janeiro. A huge part of Carnival in Trinidad is the costume contest, especially the competition for Carnival King and Queen. A particularly extravagant costume, meaning one that will be competitive for the top prize, can cost several months wages, prompting local banks to offer loans for the express purpose of designing and constructing Carnival costumes. The buildup and preparation for the celebration lasts for months, culminating in a massive three-day blowout before Ash Wednesday. The festival combines elaborate costumes with dance, music, rum, beer and generalized partying with a strong undercurrent of reckless sexuality. Music is a huge feature. Steel pan band competitions, including massive orchestras composed entirely of steel pan drummers, are held in the weeks leading up to Carnival, with the finals held on Saturday before the main event. Other music represented includes the distinctively Trinidadian styles of Calypso and Soca.

The biggest, most decadent—some say debauched—all night party event of Carnival is J’ouvert, also known as Dirty Mas, mas being short for masquerade. It takes place before dawn on Monday, meaning it ends at dawn with participants wandering dazed in the streets trying to figure out how to get home, or somewhere. Revelers may dress in costumes or just coat themselves with clay mud and brightly colored body paint, and join a band, meaning a group, as in a band of revelers. Each band marches through the streets all night long led by a float (usually pulled by a creeping farm tractor or truck) that carries an actual music band, traditionally a steel pan band. The partiers of the band follow behind the music float doing a slow-walking, jiving dance called chipping. The whole procession is followed by a beer wagon and a mud wagon, which may or may not carry more mud and body paint but always doubles as a “broom wagon” to sweep up and carry band members who are no longer able or willing to walk. Immediately following the mud wagon is the bandwagon of the next band in line, and so on, with the whole J’ouvert parade stretching through the streets for miles.

Powerboats announced that they would be entering their own band in the J’ouvert parade and everyone who wanted to join was welcome, including marina staff and cruisers from other marinas and boatyards in Chaguaramas. Their bandwagon would carry a traditional steel pan band pulled by a tractor and the rear would be brought up by a likewise traditional beer wagon carrying all you could drink, all for a moderate, set price. We signed up immediately.

More than two hundred people eventually joined our band, mostly cruisers, but also a few locals. We put on our oldest work shorts and T-shirts and boarded chartered buses into town at midnight. Once in the assembly area everybody smeared themselves liberally with Day-Glo body paint and colored mud. Then we all lubricated up with the first icy Carib lagers from the beer wagon, fell in behind our music float and started chipping down the parade route.

The dance line wiggled and swayed sluggishly thorough the tropical night, sometimes passing through crowds of cheering revelers and at other times slipping seemingly unnoticed through nearly deserted streets. The mood was festive, everyone was laughing and time passed quickly. We covered a lot of ground as the hours went by, especially considering how slowly we moved. At certain intersections the snaking procession crossed back on itself, always a cause of minor havoc, one band having to part to allow another to pass through, but never continuously and never without confusion as to who had the right-of-way. When the bandwagons were in close proximity the resulting cacophony was unrecognizable as music until they separated because each band would crank up the volume in an effort to drown out the competition. Sometimes members of one band would inadvertently or intentionally fall in with the crossing one and travel with them for a few blocks, or maybe for the rest of the night, but it didn’t matter. It was in these crossings that we got our only good view of our rival bands, if they could be considered rivals, and had a chance to evaluate their costumes, music and chipping styles. One group that made a particularly strong impression on me was the all-girl section of a band in which the young ladies were dressed in body paint and sometimes nothing else. The artists (What a job!) had been so skillful it was hard to be sure in the dim light if you were looking at a really skimpy bikini or just painted skin. We chipped along next to Tapio and Eeva for much of the night, but everybody mingled, especially back at the beer wagon, the J’ouvert equivalent of the office water cooler. When it was time for another cold one the easiest thing was to just stand aside for a couple of minutes and let the snail-like procession bring the wagon to you.





By and by the sky started to lighten and all the bands converged near the “ending up place”. This was our first view of the whole J’ouvert crowd, and it was impressively huge. There were some truly snockerd people in that bunch. Some lurched along dazed and sleep deprived, clothed in rags and caked with mud, looking like cast members of Night of the Living Dead. Others performed the classic drunk’s hurricane walk, fighting an imaginary wind as they lurched from one lamppost to the next, hanging on. Bodies were pulled from unconscious bliss in mud wagons and walked to waiting cars or buses. They might not remember a lot of what happened last night but they knew they’d had fun. I don’t know where they all went when they dispersed, but I’m sure it wasn’t the safest Monday morning to be on the roads around Port of Spain. We rode safely back to the boatyard in big crashworthy buses only to learn that Powerboats management had given orders that nobody with mud or paint on them be allowed into the showers until they were first hosed off outside. We were obliged to stand out in the cool morning air and be sprayed with cold water until we stopped bleeding colored mud onto the ground, which we all agreed was a really quick way to sober up.

The boat work dragged on and the many pieces slowly fell into place. The project list had continued to expand until it went far beyond anything we’d envisioned because, well, ‘since we’re here anyway, we might as well do it’ was the sentiment that always prevailed.

We made repeated trips to the immigration office for visa extensions, offering the requisite explanations of why we needed still more time, accompanied by explicitly heartfelt pleading (they loved that part), along with overt demonstrations of deference and respect for the authority of the presiding officer, after which the extension would invariably be granted. We always thought we knew what the outcome would be in advance, but it was still stressful because we were totally at their mercy and you can never be sure. We heard the story of a cruiser seeking an extension who mockingly dropped to his knees on the floor in front of the officer’s desk, pressed his hands together under is chin and begged, “Oh please, please sir, give me more time in your beautiful country, please, please.” He kept at it as the frustrated officer stood over him repeating, “Get up sir. Sir, get off your knees. Stand up sir. Sir!” Still, after all that, the extension was granted, so maybe that really was what they wanted. Twice we exceeded the maximum time allowance and had to leave the country to return a few days later and restart the process. In the parlance of Trinidad we “went to come back”. Our passport pages were quickly filling up with Trini visa extension, exit and reentry stamps.

One day Mr. Green showed up at the White House and told Cheryl that somebody had run over a cat out beside the highway and he thought it was one of hers. He said it got hit really hard but somehow got up and ran up into the bush on the other side of the highway. Boy didn’t come home that night so we were sure he was the one. The next morning I went with Cheryl up into the jungle searching for him. We walked for a long time calling his name, and were about to give up when she said she heard a mew. I didn’t hear it, and she admitted that she wasn’t really sure that she did either. We kept looking all around the area until she finally spotted the end of an old galvanized culvert pipe under an overgrown military road from the war era. One end was completely silted in but the other was slightly open. We went back to the boat and returned with a flashlight, some water and a few pieces of fresh yellowfin tuna. With the light we could see his eyes at the far end of the culvert but could not coax him out. We left the food and water and went home for the night. The next day the water and food were gone but we couldn’t see Boy’s eyes anymore and didn’t know if he had left, or maybe died. We couldn’t see his eyes the next day either and Cheryl figured that was the end of him.

A week later she found Boy lying near the bottom of the steps when she came down from the boat one morning. He stood up and wobbled toward her with a severe limp and an extreme S curve in his spine, then collapsed on the ground in front of her. She fed him and tended to him but he hardly moved for the rest of the day and night and was clearly in distress. The next day he was slightly better but still looked horrible, and Cheryl started to talk about maybe calling the vet to see if he should be put down. She decided to give him a few more days, just in case he got better. On the third day his spine seemed a little straighter, and he was moving around a bit more. Things were looking up. Over the next month, he straightened out noticeably, seeming to get a little less crooked each day, and soon he was his old self, scampering around straight-backed, as if it had never happened. It was an amazing recovery; he must have used up seven or eight lives.

The end was finally in sight. We’d now completed all but a few of the projects on our list, and the inventory was impressive. It was almost as if we’d constructed a new boat around the old one, and she looked it, inside and out, all ship shape, yacht-finished and geared up. There was a new epoxy and fiberglass bottom wrapping the underwater sections of the hull: two layers of eighteen-ounce biaxial glass cloth everywhere, five on the keel and ten along the leading edge, for added impact resistance. We’d built a new rudder from scratch, including the stainless steel shaft. The topsides had been faired and painted with Awlgrip, the decks stripped, re-glassed and repainted, along with the deckhouse and cockpit. Caribee sported a new twenty-eight-horsepower Kubota diesel, gearbox, shaft and propeller. She had a new roller furler and a new jib to fit it, new rigging and chainplates, new electrical wiring throughout, new water and fuel tanks and a new anchor windlass and chain. She had a new hybrid hard/soft cockpit dodger. We’d reinforced the hull forward to increase its rigidity. She had a new ham and SSB radio system with high-frequency Pactor email capability. Every surface belowdecks had been refinished, rebuilt or replaced, including a new teak cabin sole, several new cabinets and drawers, new plastic laminate in the galley along with custom tile work, a new headliner, all new foam and upholstery throughout, and much more. We installed a twenty-three-gallon-per-hour reverse osmosis watermaker. We even built a new dinghy, an eleven-foot three-piece nesting dinghy that can be sailed, rowed or motored. We named her Liz and she is tremendously more capable than our beloved little Stubby, who found a new home. We did almost all of the work ourselves, with the exception of the gelcoat peeling, some welding and a few odd jobs. It had been a long grind but now she was really the best she could be, a real world-cruising-capable small yacht ready to go anywhere.





Was it all worth it? It would certainly be hard to argue that it was from a purely economic viewpoint. We could have probably sold her as she was and taken the proceeds, along with the money spent on the refit, and bought a bigger boat (but probably not a better one). And there is no chance of ever selling her for enough to recover the cost of the refit. But that’s usually the case with any boat and as any sailor will tell you, there’s a lot more to it than that. We now knew every square centimeter of this boat, knew how to fix anything, knew for certain that there were no weaknesses or vulnerabilities anywhere that could threaten her seaworthiness. She was our home and now she was a well equipped and highly functioning cruising home with a pedigree from an esteemed designer and builder that could take us anywhere in the world in safety and comfort. So yes, to us, the refit was worth all the time, work and money. But I would never do it again.

The closer we got to launch day the more Cheryl worried about her cats. But she had not been standing still and fretting; she’d been working on a plan. There was no possibility of taking even one of them with us when we sailed (because of quarantine restrictions and logistical problems, along with all the usual problems involved with having animals onboard), so they would have to stay behind in their familiar territory, which was probably best for them anyway. Cheryl coordinated with Neville and Powerboats management to have a small, two-story, multi-compartment cathouse built and placed permanently in a spot right behind the White House, which was in a quiet, shaded part of the boatyard. It would not just be for her cats but also for any future cats that might find themselves homeless in Chaguaramas.

The big day finally came. Caribee was hoisted by the travel lift and carried down the hill. They took us to the lift slip where we were splashed amid much fanfare among our friends in the cruising community and the boatyard staff. We motored to the adjacent dock where we planned to spend a couple of weeks getting things sorted out before taking Caribee out for her post-refit maiden voyage and shakedown cruise. She was back in her element and so were we, but the cats were thrown into confusion. They milled around aimlessly, mewing constantly. Boy in particular cried all night long that first night, as we were made aware by several crewmembers of boats in the area around the White House. When Cheryl walked up there to check on them the cats all followed her back down to the dock, but they couldn’t decide whether they should stay or go back to their old home, so they spent a few days migrating back and forth between the two. Eventually they settled at the new cathouse where Cheryl had started feeding them, and after a few days seemed comfortable with their new home.

We sailed away and have not been back to Trinidad. We met a cruising couple in French Polynesia several years later who had passed through Powerboats recently. They reported that a number of cats were being kept in the boatyard, something like mascots, in a pretty little cathouse, and were being well cared for by transient sailors as well as some of the boatyard staff. I saw a grin spread across Cheryl’s face when they told her how one of the cruisers had temporarily adopted the cats during their stay and would bring small fry from the market for them on Saturday mornings.





The Secret Agent and the Ditch





Even when the sailing life was just a fantasy, every time I thought about cruising my thoughts naturally drifted to the Pacific islands. Lush volcanic spires towering above a cobalt ocean, piercing a vivid blue sky flecked with popcorn clouds. Sun-bleached, palm-studded coral atolls wrapping crystal lagoons full of flamboyant fish. This was the stuff of my dreams. I envisioned languid days spent beachcombing and mingling with the descendents of great island navigators and cannibal warriors. Okay, maybe I thought of bare-breasted, bronze-skinned maidens frolicking in the surf, too. I saw Mutiny on the Bounty like everybody else. Maybe it was the movies, or the books—books by cruisers like the Pardeys, Eric Hiscock, Hal and Margaret Roth. Maybe it was Paul Gauguin’s seductive paintings. Whatever, in my mind, real cruising meant sailing among those emerald islands sprinkled across the vast expanse of that great ocean south of the equator. Once we'd started actually cruising our own boat, whenever we met circumnavigators or other long distance sailors who had seen the best cruising grounds in the world, most of them told us the Pacific is as good as it gets. After hearing their descriptions we both agreed that was what we wanted, what we most looked forward to. Sailing the South Seas. We vowed that we would do it someday, and now it looked like someday had finally arrived.

There we were at last, anchored on the Flats at Colón, Panama, northern terminus of the world’s most famous canal, ready to embark on our most exciting adventure since the night we first sailed over the horizon toward the Bahamas a decade and a half earlier. It was an exhilarating time, and more than a little scary. We hadn’t forgotten a single one of the horror stories about yachts being crushed or slammed into the huge steel gates, their warping lines snapped like cotton twine by the wash of propellers bigger than our boat. We’d heard too of heavy fines, more than we could afford, being levied against the captains of cruising boats that disrupted canal operations because of engine failure. Old canal hands scoffed at these fears, but it seemed to us that there was plenty to be nervous about and a lot of preparations to be made.

It was scary for another reason, too. Once you transit the canal in a small boat and blow downwind for thousands of miles it’s a tough road back, to say the least. Unless you’re a real masochist or are prepared to sail all the way around the world (or both) you are finished with the Caribbean. That’s another reason we hadn’t rushed the decision. Life was good and there was so much left to see on our end of the ditch that we wanted to make sure we were really ready before showing the Americas our transom.

We had taken our sweet time sailing west from Trinidad. We concentrated on the Dutch islands of Bonaire and Curacao and the Spanish Main west of Venezuela, just about the only part of the Caribbean basin, except the forbidden (to Americans) island of Cuba, that we had not already visited. We spent five months drinking in the striking Colonial architecture of old Cartagena, then ambled down the Colombian coast to the San Blas Islands (a.k.a. Kuna Yala, now officially changed to Guna Yala) of eastern Panama where we spent more months among the Guna people in their politically autonomous island chain. A few weeks in Colón to order parts—and take our second lightning strike to the mast—and it was on to Bocas del Toro, in western Panama, where my mother and my brother and his family met us for a visit. Then, back to Colón.

The dawdling was over. It was time to start the paper chase with the Panama Canal Authority (ACP) if we were going to cross the Pacific that season. One last strategy session over icy cold Balboas at the historic Panama Canal Yacht Club and it was a go.

The first step was the admeasurement. The official admeasurer boarded Caribee and whipped out his official, calibrated tape measure and a book of forms to be filled in. He made checks of our equipment and took the numerous measurements that are apparently required, but in truth the only dimension he needed to know was the boat’s overall length. Less than fifty feet and we would be below the cutoff for the next higher tier of tariffs.

The inspection complete, we set off to the ACP offices for more reams of paperwork, photocopies and documentation. The following day we took our new credentials to the bank and paid the necessary fees and security deposits into the ACP account, the last step before the scheduling of our transit. In due course the Canal Authority officials set our date for March 7.

We were motoring the dinghy out across the Flats to Caribee after the final mind-numbing day of bureaucratic BS when a shiny new runabout packed with men dressed like Banana Republic mannequins approached and waved us down. What could this be about? They pulled alongside, nodding hellos.

The one wearing the brand new Tilly Airflow hat leaned over the runabout’s gunwale and asked in a California accent, “Do you have a sailboat anchored out on the Flats?”

“Yeah,” I said, a little hesitantly, not sure what they were up to.

“Do you want to be in the new James Bond movie we’re filming?”

I looked at Cheryl with a raised eyebrow. We already knew about the movie because a few of our cruising friends had agreed to allow their boats to be used for background in a boat chase scene.

“We pay fifty dollars a day,” he said, sensing our hesitation.

“Give us a minute,” I said. We spoke quietly, but he could probably hear what we were saying. We decided that we didn’t want to delay our transit any longer, and neither did we want to deal with the hassle of rescheduling. It was almost March and we were near the tail end of the season for sailing to French Polynesia. “I guess we’ll pass,” I said, “but thanks for the offer.”

He handed me a business card and said, “Think about it and give me a call if you change your mind. We really need more boats. Quite a few, in fact. We could use another twenty.”

“That might be a problem. Most everybody has already moved on. We’re bringing up the rear.”

He touched the brim of his hat and said, “Well, we’ll take what we can get.” He flicked his wrist at the driver and they sped away.

Late the following morning we were headed toward the yacht club dinghy dock so that we could taxi into town for some light provisioning when the same boat with the same crew headed us off and waved us down again.

“We’ll pay you a hundred dollars a day and guarantee you a minimum of two weeks,” Tilly Hat said, without preamble. “I mean to say that fourteen days would be the minimum for pay, even if it takes less time to shoot the scene. All you have to do is anchor your boat and move it a few times while we film scenes in front of you. Your boat would be background.”

This time it was Cheryl’s turn to arch her eyebrows at me. He must have caught it because he looked expectantly, almost desperately, at her.

“Let us think about it,” she said. “We have your card, we’ll give you a call later today, if you can wait?”

“I’d rather know right now.”

“We can’t give you a yes now,” I said. “We already have our transit scheduled.”

He shrugged. “Later then, but let us know as soon as you can.” They started motoring away. Just before the driver brought the launch up onto plane Tilley turned back toward us and yelled over his shoulder, “We pay cash.”

We were left drifting quietly in the harbor.

“Well,” I said, “I guess this calls for another yacht club strategy session. Maybe they’ll keep going up.”

The happy hour crowd buzzed like a hive of bees that afternoon as they bellied up to the scarred old prow-shaped hardwood bar. The white-shirted, bow-tied barman slid frigid mugs of draft beer to his customers in the dim, air-conditioned room. It was apparent that virtually all the remaining yacht crews were excited about the prospect of going Hollywood. It looked as if the movie people might get their twenty extra boats after all. The excitement was a bit contagious.

“I think we should do it,” Cheryl said. “We’d get at least fourteen hundred dollars. That’ll cover all our transit costs and leave us some money to buy provisions in Panama City. We’re going to have to load up on everything the boat will hold before we head offshore, not just for the passage, but so we won’t have to buy as much in Polynesia.”

“Yeah, we could use the money for sure, but what about the time? Even if they stick to their schedule, which I figure is doubtful, it could be two weeks after shooting ends before we can get a new transit date, and we’ll still have to provision at the other end,” I said. “It could be six weeks from now before we even sail for the Galapagos, and if we spend three weeks there it could be nearly June before we start the crossing.”

“I see what you mean, but it would be kind of neat to be in a movie. And the money.”

“Yeah,” I said, “the money. But if we don’t get to Nuku Hiva until July there’s only about four months until it’s time to head to New Zealand for cyclone season, not much time to see such a big chunk of the world.”

“Well, we can sail back to Polynesia the next season. People do that, don’t they? I just think this is something we shouldn’t pass up.”

“Some people might do it, but I don’t think we will, it’s too hard. But this deal sounds like easy money and it might be fun.” And that’s how it was settled, the way all important decisions should be made—over cold beers in a funky barroom surrounded by boisterous friends.

The next few days were consumed by filling out waivers, release forms and various agreements written by American lawyers. And waiting, the thing we had feared most. While we waited we took advantage of the opportunity to transit the canal twice as volunteer line handlers on boats belonging to other cruisers, an eye opening learning experience that did little to alleviate our nervousness about our own transit. At least we got some practice dealing with the tremendous forces involved in the locking procedures, and a sense of the shear scale of the canal apparatus.

The movie production people were tight-lipped about all details of the project. We finally did worm the name of the film out of them, Quantum of Solace, a confusing title that seemed to hold no meaning. I thought maybe I didn’t understand all the definitions of quantum? I looked it up. Still seemed like a stupid title. I figured they fed us a phony, a smokescreen to keep the real title secret.

After a few days they called a meeting of the captains and crews of all the leased boats (they referred to the arrangement as leasing) for the purpose of explaining what our roles would be. Basically, we were to anchor where they told us and move when requested, always staying belowdecks and out of sight whenever a scene was being filmed. If we needed to go ashore we were to coordinate with the marine director via VHF radio and they would pick us up and bring us back to our boats as the shooting schedule allowed. Our first anchorage would be in front of a particularly run down section of Colón’s generally run down waterfront, and was to be portrayed in the movie as Port-au-Prince, Haiti.

It was not for nothing that director Marc Forster chose Colón to represent one of the poorest, most derelict, dissipated, crime-riddled cities in the Western Hemisphere. Panama is a generally safe and politically stable country with a healthy respect for the rule of law, but Colón—often pronounced CO-lon by cruisers because it brings to mind the contents of that part of the digestive tract—is an aberration. We have been in some rough towns and rough sections of good towns over the years, but Colón stands apart. Even heavily armed policemen were leery of venturing into some areas on foot. I know there are much worse places in the world, but Colón is without doubt the worst hole I have ever been in. I really should qualify that, because there are parts of the city that don’t fit that description. There’s the huge Colón Free Trade Zone, for example. At six hundred acres it’s the largest free port in the Americas and the second largest in the world. Inside it’s gates you’re in a world apart from Colón proper and can walk about freely without fearing for your safety. It’s much the same within the confines of a couple of local shopping malls, but once you leave their gates you should get into a taxi immediately if you want to avoid being mugged, and even that might not be fast enough.

The Panama Canal Yacht Club was another oasis amid the chaos back then, before it was bulldozed to the ground in a surprise, post-midnight action one weekend a few months after we left the country, the victim of a long-running legal battle with the Panama Ports Corporation. The club was located in what may have been the most dangerous part of the city, and patrons were consistently warned by management not to venture outside the compound gates unless riding in a taxi. Nevertheless, there were always a few who just had to give it a try, and they invariably became the subjects of colorful stories. We knew one cruiser who was mugged twice in the same week just outside the gate, and slashed with a straight razor in the process. You might say he was a slow learner but maybe he should be forgiven for foggy thinking. He, along with his wife and young son, had recently been drugged unconscious by a different class of criminals.

In spite of its many problems, and my own description of it as a hole, I had a peculiar fondness for the town, though I learned not to mention that to normal people. The yacht club grounds—a collection of 1920s tropical structures sitting on a lawn dotted with whitewashed-trunked palm trees and mired in a long and steady state of decay and dilapidation—was straight out of a Hemmingway novel. The bar served the coldest beer in Central America for a dollar a bottle. The adjacent Chinese restaurant offered tasty meals for bargain prices at open-air dockside tables, and most people who ate there didn’t get that sick, notwithstanding the fact that numerous cats wandered the premises on the prowl for the apparently plentiful rats that infested the place. The hospitality of the staff and management made entering the funky old club’s gates after a taxi ride through the barrios of Colón feel like returning to the safety of the home fortress. Security in the Flats anchorage was okay (or at least nothing bad ever happened), shopping was good in the malls and supermarkets, and there was a movie theater showing newly released Hollywood movies for two dollars per ticket. Taxis were plentiful and cheap and as long as you used them consistently and were vigilant about your surroundings, the crime and squalor became just a part of the background, and in fact were used as such by the movie director. All you had to do was avoid being robbed, raped or murdered and all was good. My view was that Colón, with its crumbling old buildings and peeling paint, was a nearly perfect setting for the flick, even if it did fall somewhat short of the Port-au-Prince standard. I say that it fell short because I once commented to a canal advisor from Panama City on how Colón was a good movie stand-in for Port-au-Prince. His reply was, “No, I have been to Port-au-Prince. Believe me, Colón is a paradise compared to Port-au-Prince.”

On the first day of filming the marine director had us anchor our boats in very specific locations, spread across the bay in a slack grid pattern just off the gritty waterfront. We were to stand by on a predetermined VHF channel, and when they gave the word we were to disappear below and stay out of sight until we got the all-clear.

After most of the morning had been consumed by positioning the boats, they were ready to shoot the first scene. We ducked below out of sight as we were told, but bent the rules by peaking around the edges of the portlight curtains to watch, unseen, or so we hoped. For several long minutes nothing happened. Just as we were starting to get really bored a center-console runabout ripped past our starboard side, followed closely by a rigid-bottomed inflatable, both barely in contact with the water and clearly at the edge of control. Their engines screamed as they rocketed past just feet from our hull, automatic weapons fire rattling from the pursuing inflatable. The speeding boats quickly faded into the distance at the back of the anchorage and it was over as quickly as it had begun. It wasn’t exactly what we’d envisioned when they said we would be part of the background.

We waited for the all-clear call on the VHF, but when it didn’t come we stuck our heads out anyway to see what was going on. The shoot was apparently over because the two boats were idling back toward the staging area at the front of the fleet, followed by a large runabout with a camera pod hanging out to its side on a long articulated boom. We thought, quite foolishly as it turned out, that the scene was finished and the director would then move on to the next action sequence, but weren’t too surprised when they repeated the scene a few minutes later. This time the runabout went to our starboard side once more but the inflatable, holding who we assumed to be the two bad guys, blasted past our port side, firing over the top of Caribee as they went. Of course we knew they were shooting blanks, but it was still disconcerting to have the deck raked by machine gun fire. Surely something was being ejected from the ends of those gun barrels, and we were afraid burnt packing might get all over the decks.





No sooner had they finished the second run and returned to the starting area than a call from the marine director came over the VHF, “Everybody stay below and out of sight, and put those cameras away. And stop peaking.”

Again the boats ripped through the anchorage, zigzagging through the fleet, nearly out of control, blasting away with machine guns. This time the man and woman in the runabout were fighting with each other, with nobody steering their boat. It was all enough to make us a little nervous. I mean, we knew these were stunt people who supposedly knew what they were doing, but I knew boats and I knew they were only marginally in control of their vessels as they careened through the fleet, sometimes almost airborne.

Another high-speed run, more shooting at the fleeing, fighting couple in the runabout, this time by two inflatables firing machine guns. As we surreptitiously peeked out at the action, part of the mystery was solved when a driver stood up from inside the center console of the fleeing boat where he had been steering from his concealed station. So that’s how they could drive the boat while fighting and not looking where they were going. I had thought it was steered by remote control, and even learning that the driver was onboard didn’t give me much assurance that they wouldn’t slam into one of the anchored sailboats, maybe ours.

We thought at first that the couple in the fleeing runabout were the stars, Daniel Craig and Olga Kurylenko, but soon realized they were only stand-ins. In later sequences they did film some of the runs with the actual actors in the boat, but those were not the norm and it was clear that the stunt people were doing the heavy lifting. The same scene, with only minor variations, was repeated all day long, right up until late afternoon when shooting ended and we were released to go.

The next day saw us back in the same anchorage with the crew shooting the same scene. None of the cruisers we knew had experience with movie production, and the few production people we talked with parted with snippets of information like they were hundred dollar bills. Little did we know it was only the beginning. Day after day the same high-speed runs were made through the fleet, with the only obvious variations being the direction of travel, the number of pursuing inflatable boats and the location of the anchorage. We had to move frequently, sometimes as many as five times a day, and twice they moved the entire fleet all the way across the harbor to Shelter Bay Marina, some three miles to the north. Once, they even moved our boat while we weren’t onboard. We returned from our third canal transit as line handlers for friends to find our boat anchored in a completely different location from where we’d left it. Everything onboard was okay and we were told that the movie crew had handled the move in a professional manner, but they’d promised not to move us when we were not aboard. No harm, no foul, and after all, the show must go on.

After a few days of this routine any semblance of glamour had evaporated and it all became a tad boring. Just when we had stopped bothering to look up from our novels to watch the action a loud crash and excited yelling grabbed our attention and we popped out into the cockpit to see what was going on. As I’d feared might happen, one of the big rigid-bottomed inflatable boats had slammed into an anchored yacht, ripping the stainless steel swim platform from its transom. The owner was in the cockpit, yelling and waving his arms wildly at the marine director’s boat. The marine director brought his boat alongside the damaged trimaran for a conference and the owner seemed to be placated. We later learned that he was paid several thousand dollars more than what repairs would cost, so was actually happy to have been hit. We contemplated whether it might be a good thing if they hit us, too. They did in fact have at least one more collision with an anchored boat over the coming days, but nobody suffered serious damage.

The scale of the production required to film this single scene was mind boggling to us. Never having been around this type of operation, we were amazed at the army of workers and the array of equipment involved. There appeared to be more than two hundred staffers, most of them employed for reasons that were far from obvious to a casual observer. And those were just the ones we could see. Large numbers seemed to do little more that stand around and wait all day. The logistics of maintaining this workforce required a secondary army of workers just to keep the first group fed, watered, housed and transported. All the food seemed to be catered, and my guess was that the meals were flown in from outside Panama every day, probably from the United States. The cost of all this must have been staggering, no doubt well into the millions for the three weeks that were devoted to filming this scene, not even counting the preparation and unwinding of the operation. You might think that with a commitment of this magnitude the chase scene would be a prominent part of the movie, but you would be wrong. We have since watched the movie in slow motion, and even in frame-by-frame mode, trying in vain to catch a glimpse of Caribee. The entire chase has a run time of just over two minutes, a dizzying two-minute blitz of disconnected images that is almost impossible to follow as a coherent action scene.

After the filming wrapped up it was time to get serious about our transit. We rescheduled it for the next Thursday, the twenty-seventh of March, just five days away. We’d thought that most of our preparations had been complete before the transit was postponed, but as the new deadline approached we started remembering more that needed to be done. With the big day less than a week away, we found that there weren’t enough hours in the day to accomplish all we had left to do, even by getting up before dawn and working until after dark. We needed to get more rest, but we needed even more to feel fully prepared. What had seemed like plenty of time suddenly felt like way too little. We began to second-guess our readiness. Did we have enough plastic-wrapped tires to protect the topsides? Could we count on our line handlers being available on transit day or should we line up back-up crew? Should I reconfirm that we would get the required lengths of heavy warping line that we’d reserved? Was there plenty of food for the five-person crew and the advisor, quality food that would be easy to prepare during the pauses between bursts of activity? Was the engine in tip-top condition for the maximum-speed run across Gatun Lake?

Finally it was our last day in the Caribbean. It was now or never on the prep. Up at dawn, we did four loads of laundry at the yacht club and then taxied to Supermercado Rey where we bought three rotisserie chickens, several vats of potato salad, cole slaw and baked beans along with dozens of cans and bottles of soft drinks and water. Back at the yacht club dock where we’d tied up to make the final preparations we iced down the drinks, cleared the decks of unnecessary gear, flaked the rented warps on deck and secured the makeshift tire-fenders to cleats and lifelines. We tied thick towels over the glass of our solar panels to protect them from the lead-filled monkey’s fists of the heaving lines and tied off the wind generator to keep the lines from tangling in its spinning blades. At 1600 our single professional Panamanian line handler, Naldo, stepped aboard and we released the dock lines and motored out to the Flats to await the arrival of the canal advisor. We rafted up to Irene. Our good friends Tapio and Eeva were going to be additional line handlers for our transit. Regulations required us to have at least four line handlers plus a helmsman. The first mate can double as a line handler so Cheryl made four.

The big steel pilot boat with its rumbling diesel approached just before sunset. We released Caribee from Irene and idled out into the anchorage to meet it. The captain eased her bow right up to Caribee’s beam and the advisor stepped lightly onboard. He introduced himself as Miguel and directed us to motor across Bahía Limón in the fading light, toward the Gatun Locks approach some two miles to the southwest.

All yacht and small vessel transits were being scheduled at night in order to minimize any inconvenience to the real clients of the Canal Authority, the big ships. It was obvious that the ACP considered yacht transits a nuisance and would have preferred not to handle small private vessels at all. Understandable when you consider that a heavily laden container ship built to the Panamax metric, the largest size that can fit into the canal’s locks, might pay a toll upwards of two hundred thousand dollars while we, being less than fifty feet long, paid only six hundred while consuming essentially the same quantity of resources. Consequently, yachts got the worst transit times with little consideration shown for the crews’ preferences or concerns.

One of the ways they mitigated the impact of the pesky little boats was to raft them together and lock them through in groups of three, or sometimes two sets of three if there was enough traffic. Small private craft were usually obliged to share the locks with large ships to further speed things along. Good for the ACP, not so good for the yachts. Rafting up and crowding into locks with seagoing behemoths presented all manner of possibilities for damage and mayhem. It meant that three boats had to attach themselves to each other, sometimes coordinating the maneuver without speaking a common language, and without colliding hard enough in the process to cause damage. Doing it all in the dark only added to the anxiety. After completing the raft-up they had to navigate into the locks as one entity, trying to find center-channel primarily by coordinating power application among the boats. They had to disengage after leaving the locks, motor away separately and do it all over again before approaching the next set. Raft-ups sometimes had to be attempted while powerful tugboats steamed past with total disregard for the damage their big wakes might cause to sailboats attempting the delicate operation while rolling heavily and trying to prevent their masts and rigging from slamming together. Untold numbers of boats have had rigs damaged this way over the years.

As we, along with our two transit mates, were on final approach to the first of the triple locks a large canal tug steaming back toward the bay passed us port-to-port making at least ten knots and kicking up a steep wake. When the wake hit it slammed our port quarter and threw the boat sideways. The steep wake bounced up off our hull and into the cockpit, wetting me, Eeva and Miguel, who lost his balance and almost fell. I heard breaking glass and a scream from down below.

“What’s going on out there!” Cheryl was staring out from the galley with a pissed off look on her face, palms up.

“Don’t blame me,” I said, “a tug threw up a big wake.”

Miguel was spewing Spanish invective into his handheld VHF, chastising the tug captain, who throttled down immediately, a bit too late to help us.

“It threw a bowl out of the dish rack and shattered it all over the cabin sole,” Cheryl said. In all our miles at sea that had never happened, but a vicious wake callously thrown in a narrow channel had done the trick.

The advisors had the three boats idling in the darkness just outside the first chamber of the Gatun Locks while talking among themselves on their radios, working out the details of a plan. After a few minutes the biggest of the three, the English-flagged ketch Crazy Diamond, was directed to hold station in center channel while we rafted to her starboard side and Elkouba tied to her port. I turned across her bow to circle around and come up slowly from behind her, taking advantage of Caribee’s maneuverability in tight quarters. I eased gently up alongside Crazy Diamond. When we were within arms reach both crews started passing lines to each other, lashing the boats tightly together. The tires and fenders compressed between the hulls as the lash-up was tightened. I kept a close eye on the position of the masts, making sure they didn’t end up directly side-by-side so that any more fun with tug wakes wouldn’t slam them violently together. Elkouba came up on the other side and the two crews made that connection fast, completing our raft. Miguel told me to put the gearbox in neutral and Crazy Diamond was directed by the senior advisor to start motoring into the lock. Now and then Miguel would tell me to engage the prop and give it a short burst of power to help steer the raft to port, or give a bit of reverse thrust to help turn to starboard. We proceeded very slowly past the massive gates and into the floodlighted confines of the hundred-year-old chamber, gliding at bare steerageway up behind a large ship that was tied off ahead of us. The ACP always puts ships in front of small vessels when locking up and behind them when locking down. All Panama Canal locks are in parallel sets, so it’s possible to have vessels locking up in one set and down in the other, or to double the traffic headed in the same direction.

When we eased to a stop the line walkers on shore heaved monkey’s fist knots packed with lead weights and attached to lightweight messenger lines down to us from the lock walls high above. Since we were on the starboard side of the raft, the two lines to our right were thrown to us and the lines to our left were thrown down to Elkouba. Crazy Diamond’s crew had it easy. Being in the middle, they didn’t have to handle any lines at all.

As soon as the monkeys’ fists were caught the forward and aft line handlers tied our heavy warping lines to the messenger lines. One end of each of our lines had a large spliced loop, and that was the end that was attached to the messenger line. The line walkers on shore started heaving on the messenger lines, pulling the warps up to the lock walls where their loops were dropped over large bollards set into the concrete. Our line handlers and their counterparts on Elkouba began taking in the remaining slack, trying to equalize the distance so that the raft stayed near center-lock and away from the jagged concrete walls. When the warps were tight they were wrapped around cleats, but not locked off, because they would have to be continuously taken in when the chamber started to fill and the water level began to rise.





The immense six-foot-thick lock gates slowly swung shut behind us. A Klaxon horn blasted a warning and within seconds the water in the lock started to boil and churn violently. The valves had been opened and fresh water from Gatun Lake was filling the chamber through railroad-tunnel-sized conduits under its bottom. Each cycle of the Gatun Locks requires twenty-seven million gallons of water. The chambers are a hundred ten feet wide and a thousand fifty feet long, and it takes less than ten minutes to fill a chamber thirty feet deep. That quantity of water rushing in so fast creates extreme turbulence, and our little raft was being buffeted back and forth every few seconds, putting heavy strain on the warps, cleats and connections between the boats. We were rising steadily upward, meaning that all the warping lines were continually getting slack and having to be taken in by our line handlers and those on Elkouba. It required constant attention to keep our raft near center-lock. At one point the entire mass of the raft came up short against our starboard quarter line, loading up the three-strand nylon, making it stretch and creak under the strain. We all watched transfixed as the chock it passed through started to shift and bend and groan. Would it snap the bolts or would they hold? After a few seconds the raft started to shift back to starboard and the line went slack, followed immediately by Elkouba coming up short on her lines, loading her cleats heavily. The back and forth dance went on as we climbed higher above sea level, the swirling currents first pushing our raft to one side and then the other, tightening and slacking the lines on each side in turn as we rose. Whenever one side went slack, the line handlers on that side pulled in some line to tighten it up again before the next time it came under load. This chamber would lift us about thirty feet; the three together would take us up eighty-five feet to the level of Gatun Lake, which would float us across to the Pacific side of Panama.

As we came up near eye level with the top of the lock, the roiling of the water slowed, then stopped. After a few minutes a horn sounded and though we couldn’t see past the ship in front of us, we knew the gates to the next lock were swinging open. The next step was the part where boats can easily be damaged if the ship pilot makes a mistake. It takes a lot of energy to overcome the inertia of a big ship at rest. They are moved between locks by cables attached to large locomotive engines called electric mules, which run on tracks along the top of the lock walls. Sometimes the pilot will direct the ship’s captain to bump his propeller forward a few turns to help the mules start the ship moving. The problem with this for boats behind the ship is that it kicks back a powerful wall of water, sometimes powerful enough to snap the warps or rip deck hardware from a yacht, breaking the raft free from its restraints and slamming the boats into the jagged concrete walls. The pilots have become more alert to this after several well-publicized incidents, and it had been a while since it had happened, but we were still anxious. The ship ahead of us was not a Panamax, but it was quite large and would be difficult to get moving.

Luckily, the ship didn’t engage its propeller. It very gradually started to move away from our bows as the electric mules groaned to overcome its mass. Someone on the lock walls blew a whistle and the advisors told us to slack the lines. Crazy Diamond was instructed to move forward at idle speed and we were to be ready to add forward or reverse thrust as needed to help steer the raft. As we followed behind the ship the line walkers, as their title implies, walked along beside us holding the ends of our lines, pulling the warps forward as we went. After we passed the next set of gates into the second lock our raft came to a stop behind the ship once more and the line walkers dropped the loops over another set of bollards. The gates swung closed behind us, the Klaxon sounded and the water began to churn.

Locking through the second and third chambers was a replay of the first, minus the drama of deck hardware stressed to the breaking point. It was 2130 when we eased out of the last lock and into the calm, dark waters of Gatun Lake. We breathed a sigh of relief when Miguel told us to break the raft and motor individually to the ships’ buoys about a mile away, where we would tie up for the night.

Once we had secured the three boats to two large mooring buoys a pilot launch arrived to take Miguel off. We would have a different pilot for tomorrow’s passage across the lake and the locking down to the Pacific. For now it was time put our concerns aside and unwind a bit, to even out the strain. We popped the tabs on some cold cans of Balboa to celebrate safely completing what should be the most stressful part of the transit. The whole crew soon turned in and tried to get some sleep. Tomorrow’s leg would start early and it was going to be a long one.

All hands were up before dawn for coffee and a simple breakfast. The boat had to be squared away and made shipshape and ready to go before the advisor arrived. The pilot launch hove into view at 0730 and within minutes our new advisor, Enrique, was stepping over the lifelines and into the cockpit. He directed us to untie from the buoy and get underway at once, heading across the lake in a southeasterly direction. I had studied the canal charts in detail but still had trouble wrapping my mind around the fact that going from the Caribbean to the Pacific meant traveling from northwest to southeast. It felt like we should be, in fact it felt like we were, going west, but because of an anomaly in the shape of the isthmus we would exit the last chamber of the Miraflores Locks some twenty miles east of the Gatun Locks.

The run across the lake was a twenty-six-mile dash between unspoiled jungle islands and through barren man-made cuts. The finish line was at Pedro Miquel Locks, the first downward-locking chamber for Pacific bound vessels. I call it a dash because Enrique, as we had known he would, stressed that time was of the essence and we were to make maximum speed. All through the morning his eyes darted from our knot log to his wristwatch and back. His concern was that a yacht would hold up the lockdown of a ship and he didn’t want it to happen on his watch. I caught him looking at the water passing by our hull and back at the knot log and knew what was going through his mind. I imagined he’d seen every trick in the book and knew we weren’t really making seven knots, but to his credit he said nothing. I had calibrated the speed log to read high.

Much is made of the requirement that all vessels transiting the canal must be able to maintain a speed of at least eight knots. I even had to sign a form stating as much to the admeasurer. In reality, few small sailboats can make such speed under power and everyone, including the ACP officials, knows it. They expect a certain fudge factor, but they do want you to give them your best turn of speed and they expect it to be relatively fast. Admitting that your boat can’t make eight knots, or spectacularly failing to make a good approximation during the transit, will nearly double your transit toll.

We plowed across the lake, our little Kubota twenty-eight-horsepower diesel pegged near its redline. We drank in the jungle scenery as we passed just yards away, taking shortcuts from the main channels. We had the advantage of being able to use some narrow and shallow passes that the big ships could not, so were not bothered by commercial shipping on this segment.

Gatun Lake is manmade, an impoundment formed when Gatun Dam was erected across the Chagres River. The dam and the lake it created are what make the Panama Canal possible. The lake provides the water to fill the locks and comprises a reservoir with an elevation high enough that ships can steam across all but the loftiest sections of the backbone of the isthmus. Because of the lake, the only major excavation required to float ships between the two oceans is Gaillard Cut (originally called Culebra Cut). The lake also supplies water to both Panama City and Colon, and the dam generates hydroelectric power to run the more than one thousand electric motors that power canal operations, making the canal system self powering. Taken as a whole it’s a marvel of engineering and construction, and the fact that it was completed more than a century ago and is still functioning flawlessly every day in its original configuration is truly a tribute to the designers and builders. The American Society of Civil Engineers names it as one of the seven wonders of the modern world and ranks it third, behind only the Giza Pyramids and the Hoover Dam, on the list of greatest engineering and construction feats ever accomplished by man. It arguably changed the world more than any other building project ever undertaken. There is an excellent book on the building of the canal by David McCullough entitled The Path Between the Seas. It’s a fascinating read that goes into great detail about all aspects of the project and I would highly recommend it to anyone.

After a couple of hours we left the jungle scenery behind and approached the more narrow confines of the Gamboa Reach. We started to pick up some shipping traffic once we were back in the main channel. Canal tugs and an occasional container ship passed, headed in the opposite direction. The wind had started to fill in from the north so we rolled out the jib and gained enough speed to make our seven-knot reading seem a little more plausible. Soon, we entered the northwest end of Gaillard Cut. It was easy to see why the cut had caused so much grief during construction of the canal. The unstable composition of the earth here had caused numerous landslides that had resulted in long delays and much loss of life. Ultimately, the cut had to be redesigned and the slope angled at a much more shallow grade, resulting in the long cutback seen today. It meant that much more dirt had to be removed than had originally been planned for, but there was no other option.

Time wasn’t standing still in Gaillard Cut. All along its banks giant dump trucks, bulldozers and earth moving scrapers were hard at work widening the channel. Floating dredges were vacuuming mud from the bottom and piping it ashore to be hauled away. The water ran dark brown, stained by the muddy runoff. The construction of a new set of larger locks had begun at both ends of the canal and the cut had to be deepened and widened to prevent its becoming a chokepoint for the bigger class of ships that would soon be plying it. That upgrade is now complete and the new locks are in operation. The canal can now accommodate a much larger class of ships called New Panamax.

Shortly after we passed the highest point of land along the canal, technically the Continental Divide, the magnificent Centennial Bridge came into view. The imposing and futuristic cable-stayed structure was completed in 2004, built for the purpose of rerouting the Pan-American Highway and relieving congestion on the Bridge of the Americas. The Pedro Miguel Locks were just beyond the Centennial Bridge.

As we approached Pedro Miguel it was time once again for the raft-up boogie, but at least this time it was daylight and we’d had practice with the crews of the other two boats. By now we were, while not exactly ignoring our advisors, taking matters into our own hands regarding the details of the operation. Enrique seemed to sense that we knew the procedure and probably understood that cutting out the middleman made communication between captains more efficient.

Locking down was a piece of cake compared to locking up. Gone was the swirling turbulence of the filling chambers, replaced by the gentle receding of the water until we had stabilized at the lower level. The ship sharing the chamber was behind us this time, as we expected. The only thing that the line handlers really had to be alert to was the gradual tightening of the lines as we dropped. It wouldn’t do to have a warp cleated fast while the boat continued dropping from the top of the lock walls. Once the slack came out of the line, if the crew didn’t quickly pay out some more you could kiss that cleat goodbye.

The big gates swung open and Miraflores Lake lay before us. Since it’s a small lake, about a mile in length, the advisors had us remain rafted together for the trip down to the Miraflores Locks. We entered the first chamber of the Miraflores with no problems and began another gradual descent. There was a live webcam stationed there and we had advised friends and relatives to watch for our transit. We waved to the cameras as we dropped lower, wondering if anyone we knew was watching. Presently we stopped going down and the gates opened into the last lock. One more short descent and we would be home free. I figured that pure perversity would dictate that if anything bad were going to happen, this would be the time and place, when the end was almost in sight. Nothing did, and smooth as silk we were sitting calmly in the center of the chamber when the lock gates swung open and there it was—the Pacific Ocean.

Cheryl looked at me and said, “It’s the Pacific. We’re in the Pacific now.”

“Yeah, we’re really here,” I said, and gave her a hug.

Tapio and Eeva were grinning and shaking our hands, patting us on the back, but we didn’t have much time for sentiment. Enrique and the other two advisors started barking instructions about breaking the raft and getting out of the way. There was a ship behind us and her pilot was ready to roll, uninterested in a bunch of yachties high-fiving each other under his bow. We wasted no time in complying with their instructions and quickly untied and motored out into the Gulf of Panama.





Within minutes a steel pilot launch approached our port side. I started to throttle back but Enrique told me to maintain course and speed because the pilot launch captains were used to taking advisors and pilots off of moving boats. They may have been used to it, but not necessarily good at it. Just as Enrique was about to step off Caribee and onto the pilot boat the steel vessel bumped us a good solid lick. Enrique jumped across and the launch immediately veered away and took off at high speed, but not before I got the boat’s name. I looked over the side, studying the point of impact, but after a while had to confess that there was no apparent damage, thanks to the tires no doubt.

Soon we were passing under the Bridge of the Americas, the first permanent bridge across the Panama Canal and the original route of the Pan-American Highway. Just past the bridge on our port side was the Balboa Yacht Club. We swung into the mooring area and called the club launch on VHF. The old one-lunger diesel-powered open boat chugged out and took Tapio, Eeva and Naldo off, and for a few dollars took away the old plastic-wrapped tires. Our three line handlers went off to catch a bus back to Colón while we continued on to the La Playita anchorage down near the end of the causeway.

“It feels different over here,” I said as we putted down toward the anchorage, the adrenaline finally starting to wear off. “I don’t know if it’s the air, the smells or what, but I don’t think I’m imagining it.”

“It really does,” Cheryl said. “I think it just feels big. I can feel that ocean out there, like some giant sleeping creature breathing.”

“Well, I guess we’d better get used to it. I think we’re going to be in it for a while.”

It was a milestone in our cruising life: the forty-eight mile crossing of Panama, the path between the seas. Next on the agenda was the four thousand mile downwind passage to the Marquesas Islands. It felt like we were about to jump off a cliff.





The Enchanted Islands





Oh no, we forgot to give King Neptune his due,” Cheryl said. “That’s bad luck. What are we gonna do?”

“Well, let’s give it to him now,” I said.

“It’s too late, you have to do it when you cross over.”

“Well, I guess we’ll just have to cross back over and come back again. Not a big deal, it’s less than a quarter of a mile.”

“That’ll make three crossings, so we’ll have to do three toasts, and give Neptune three shots.”

“Whatever." I disengaged the Aries linkage and put the helm down, swinging Caribee’s bow through the wind and heading to the northwest. “Give him a dollop now for the first one and we’ll do two more toasts when we cross over and back,” I said. “That ought to work. It’s not like we have a shortage of rum.” In point of fact we didn’t have a shortage of anything except freeboard, having spent hundreds of dollars on provisions of all kinds before departing Panama City.

Cheryl uncapped the bottle of Abuelo Añejo and poured a generous measure into the sea. “There,” she said, “That should keep him happy until we get back to the line.”

Our concern about crossing the equator without paying our respects to King Neptune was lighthearted and a bit tongue-in-cheek, but all sailors are somewhat superstitious, whether they admit it or not. When you’re entirely at the mercy of the forces of nature and laws of probability day after day it makes sense to cover all your bases, especially in regard to long-standing nautical traditions. Besides, this was a big moment for us and we were having some fun with it. We wanted to tell our friends that we’d done it right. We had watched with growing anticipation as we approached the line, eyes riveted to the display of our GPS receiver as the latitude readout clicked steadily downward until it read 00:00:00N, then switched instantly to 00:00:00S. Just numbers, really. Everything out on the ocean looked the same, but it wasn’t the same for us. We’d sailed into the Southern Hemisphere for the first time. No longer lowly pollywogs, we were shellbacks now. We let out a cheer, kissed and drank a toast, but in our excitement forgot to pour the requisite shot over the side for The King.

We were seven days out of Islas Las Perlas, Panama when we crossed and it had been a much better trip than we had any right to expect. Once we cleared the Gulf of Panama there had been enough wind to sail, and after passing Punta Mala the canal-bound shipping traffic had dropped off sharply. It hadn’t been a particularly fast passage but we hadn’t had to motor much once the wind filled in. Better yet, the band of squalls and doldrums that likes to hang out around the equator had been mercifully narrow. We only had a hundred and thirty miles left to go to our landfall, the historic anchorage at Wreck Bay on Isla San Cristóbal, Galápagos Islands.

I spotted the side of San Cristóbal’s central mountain peak through the clouds just after noon the next day and shouted out in my most booming voice the call I had been biding my time to give. “Land ho!”

Jarred from her nap, Cheryl came on deck looking a little bleary. She gave me a subdued version of the traditional nautical response, “Where away?” I pointed to a dim shape fine on our port bow. Since it took an effort to distinguish land from clouds at this distance, she soon opted to return to her dreams and wait for a better view.

As we sailed through the afternoon, the island’s wide, gently sloping coastal plain slowly gathered form in front of the high volcanic mountain set back into its center. We had been seeing brown boobies for several days and now their blue-footed cousins appeared. I was on the lookout for sea lions. The Galápagos are home to a major population and I figured some might venture out this far to feed.

It was obvious that Wreck Bay, situated at the western end of the island, was beyond our reach during daylight hours and since I had no intention of trying it at night (they don’t call it Wreck Bay for nothing) we hove to off the north coast with the expectation of sailing into port the next morning. The island’s landmass killed off what little breeze remained and we drifted calmly through the night, gently rocking in a long, slow swell. I set a proximity alarm on the radar and put out an anchor light for visibility to any traffic that might happen along. We both turned in early and paid off some of the sleep deficit we had accumulated over the past week.

The rising sun lit up the cabin and woke us. We decided to have coffee and breakfast before getting underway for the short trip into the harbor, figuring we might be too busy after getting the anchor down. After we finished eating and washing up I started the engine as usual and shifted into forward. Nothing happened.

“Shit,” I said. “I think the Antichrist is slipping again.”

“You’ve got to be kidding me.”

“There’s definitely some kind of problem. I’ll open the access hatch so I can see what’s happening.”

This piece-of-crap ZF gearbox had been an oozing open sore on the backside of our lives since the day it first made its way onboard. More accurately, it and its ilk had been. This one was a warranty replacement. The original had come attached to the new engine we’d installed in Trinidad and had failed virtually right out of the box, after less than fifteen hours. This incarnation had already started slipping by the time we reached Colombia and before we got to the San Blas Islands was nearly unusable. We had gotten lucky and found a German cruiser who was a retired ZF mechanic who happened to be anchored at the remote little island of Cayo Chichime. With his guidance we pulled out the gearbox, took it apart, re-situated a wayward ball bearing and switched the reverse and forward thrust plates. I guess that’s what you would call a field repair, or more precisely in this case, a beach repair. It was successful and after the pieces were put back together it had worked flawlessly, until now.

With the cockpit sole hatch removed I could watch the prop shaft and coupling when I engaged the gearbox. It was slipping alright, but I found that if I revved the engine and then backed down on the throttle the gearbox would engage and drive the boat forward without slipping, so long as I increased the speed very gradually. We nursed the gearbox along in this fashion and were soon at the mouth of the harbor, idling along amidst a colony of frolicking sea lions. We dropped the anchor at 0930 and within minutes a water taxi bearing a uniformed representative of the Port Captain’s office came alongside. I was glad we’d had our breakfast offshore since it looked like things were about to get hectic. The officer welcomed us to San Cristóbal and asked how long we planned to stay. This was a question we had anticipated, and our answer might prove crucial to our allotted time here.

Galápagos rules were not friendly to visiting yachts at the time and have reportedly gotten worse since. Officially, you were only allowed to stop for seventy-two hours for fueling and provisioning unless you were in possession of a cruising permit, known as an autographo. This document must be acquired in advance from officials in mainland Ecuador (or an overseas embassy) at a considerable cost of time, effort and money. It also comes with several restrictions on the boat’s movements, but does allow you to visit up to five inhabited ports in the archipelago for a total of one month, with the possibility of extending the visit for an additional month. It obligates you to buy a National Park permit for each person onboard, at a hundred dollars per person, and requires that you use the services of an agent for entry procedures. The total cost could run between several hundred to more than a thousand dollars, much more for larger yachts, especially if they wanted sail within the boundaries of the park. We were not prepared to sacrifice so much of our limited cruising funds for any one area, not even the Galápagos. Still, we might have considered it if we’d had enough time to spend there, but it was already May and we needed to get on across the Pacific before the season of benign weather matured further.

Fortunately there was a third option that cruisers on a budget or a deadline often employed. Boats with fewer than ten persons aboard and arriving from a foreign port may have their seventy-two-hour stay extended for up to twenty days in case of an emergency, at the discretion of the Port Captain. Galápagos port captains were notoriously fickle at the time, sometimes allowing you to claim even a need to provision as an emergency, sometimes going so far as to require you to undergo inspection by a mechanic (at your cost) if you claimed engine problems, for instance. I thought it might turn out to be something of a blessing that we actually did have a gearbox problem, though it was very real and certainly should be dealt with before our Pacific crossing continued.

“We would like to stay for twenty days,” I said. “We have a transmission problem that has to be repaired.”

“That should not be a problem,” the officer said in perfect English. “You may go ashore and engage an agent for your paperwork.”

This was another gray area of Galápagos rules, with little apparent rhyme or reason. Sometimes captains are allowed to act as their own agents and sometimes they are required to hire one, seemingly at the whim of the Port Captain. There have reportedly been instances where some boats were required to hire an agent and others were not, on the same day in the same port.

“I wish to act on my own behalf,” I said. “I don’t want to retain an agent.”

“Okay, that is no problem. You are welcome to stay for twenty-four hours.”

“I believe I’m allowed a minimum seventy-two hours in an emergency, under international law, am I not? And I do have a serious mechanical problem.”

“Sorry, one day, under our law, unless you use an agent,” he said. “There are two agents in town.” He handed me a slip of paper with the printed name and address of Victor, brother-in-law of Johnny Romero, a well-known agent located in Academy Bay on the larger island of Santa Cruz. He didn’t mention the alternative.

“If I do hire an agent will we get the twenty days?”

“You may,” he said with a grin, “if you use Victor and Carmela.” It was easy enough to figure out what was going on here, but there was little to be done about it. We decided to pay a visit to Victor.

We called for a water taxi on the VHF. While you are not forbidden to use your own dinghy to go ashore in Wreck Bay it’s not a good idea and few sailors do it. The problem is the sea lions. Males can reach almost a thousand pounds and the animals are everywhere in the bay and along the shoreline. They will climb into and onto anything that floats or is left on the beach. They’re especially fond of dinghies and you definitely don’t want them in yours. The adults are big enough to sink an average tender and they leave a stinking, hair-encrusted, greasy goop on everything they touch. They emit a stench like billy goats only more pungent. They’re cute to look at, but keep them off your boat. Caribee’s freeboard is so low that we were afraid they might climb on deck, so we erected “sea lion guards” of lightweight Dacron line laced between the lifelines and deck. We left Liz safely stowed on deck for the duration of our stay.

We rode the water taxi across the bay toward the Muelle Ecoturistico, the new ecotourism dock in front of the charming seaside village of Baquerizo Moreno, also the capital Galápagos Province. Blue-footed boobies circled high above the bay, wheeling until they spotted a meal swimming below the surface, whereupon they tucked in their wings and became missiles, screaming down at fantastic speed until they slammed into the water and shot down onto their unsuspecting prey, trailing streams of bubbles through the cold, clear water. Seldom did they surface without a fish dangling from their beaks. We passed close by anchored tour boats awaiting passengers and moored fishing skiffs overloaded with lolling sea lions basking in the sun on carpets of hairy slime. The animals showed no fear. They seemed to know they are now protected by law and can’t be harmed by people. They appeared to be taunting us, daring us to try and run them off their co-opted perches. Brilliant equatorial sunshine sparkled on the bay’s surface. It looked hot, but the air felt unnaturally cool, chilled by the frigid water. The Humboldt Current flows directly up from the high latitudes at the southern tip of Chile and right through the Galápagos archipelago, dropping the water temperature many degrees below what it would otherwise be. One of the great ocean currents of the world, its low salinity and cool temperatures make it possible for many of the exceptional life forms of these islands to thrive, particularly the marine animals.

Victor and Carmela were in their office, which is to say they were in their small tienda that sold groceries and some dry goods, one of a dozen such stores scattered about town, all selling more or less the same things. We told them what we needed and asked what their fee would be. Victor eyed us and appeared to think it over. It occurred to me that he might be judging our likely affluence before responding. He furled his brow and asked, “How long is your boat?”

“Only thirty-two feet,” I said. “Very small.”

“Um. I will have to call Johnny on Santa Cruz, please to wait.” He punched in some numbers on a desk phone and spoke in rapid-fire Spanish for a minute, then looked up and said, “Three hundred dollars?” It sounded like a question.

“What!”

“Two hundred,” he quickly corrected, “two hundred dollars.”

“That’s too much,” I said. “Unless it includes the government fees?”

“That is the agent fee.”

“That’s it? No immigration or customs fees? No port dues or anything? Nothing?”

“Not nothing. Is for my agent service and my expenses.”

“It’s too much. We’ll just sail on in the morning.” I was bluffing of course. We had to fix the gearbox and there was no way we were going to miss seeing some of the parklands.

“Okay, Okay. How much you want to pay?” Ah, that question again. How many times had we been asked that? Of course we didn’t want to pay anything. What he really wanted to know was what we would stand for.

“I don’t really even need an agent but they’re making me hire one. I think they want me to hire you but maybe I should check with the other one.”

“That's a good idea," Cheryl said. "Let’s go see the other agent.”

“Okay, one hundred dollars,” Victor said. He smiled and added, “For you.”

We agreed to pay Victor the hundred. He would do little more for his fee than make a few photocopies, but we had no choice, and I reminded myself that it was a lot less than many cruisers ended up paying to stop here, even considering the additional fees we would have to pay. We gave him our passports, vessel documentation and clearance papers from Panama. We agreed to come back tomorrow to collect our documents and pay his and the government’s fees.

We spent the rest of that day and the next exploring town and checking out the National Park Visitor Center just outside town on the east side of Wreck Bay. It was a very laid-back place, altogether friendly and pleasant. We were anxious to explore the rest of the island, which was almost entirely within the park, but since wishful thinking and hopeful waiting had not fixed the gearbox, I decided it was up to me. If parts were required I wanted to order them as soon as possible. If the twenty-day limit was strictly enforced and we couldn’t repair the problem before our time expired we would be faced with sailing engineless across the Pacific, or beating back to Panama or Ecuador to make repairs. I thought the downwind sail to the Marquesas would be preferable but didn’t much fancy that either, and making repairs in French Polynesia was likely to be hellishly expensive if parts were needed.

There was no German mechanic to hold my hand in Wreck Bay, but I had taken photos and notes the first time I pulled out and cracked open the gearbox so didn’t have to rely only on memory. I’d also downloaded a shop manual in Panama City. The short version of the story is that after the best part of three days I had not found any evidence of problems inside the gearbox, so I reassembled the whole lot and refilled it with the recommended automatic transmission fluid. I had no reason to think it would work since I hadn’t really done anything to fix it, but held my breath and gave it a try. Amazingly, it didn’t seem to be slipping. I gradually increased the power, quickly bringing it up to high revs, first in forward and then in reverse as Caribee danced around on her anchor rode. It didn’t slip. I crossed my fingers and declared it fixed, but I had little confidence that it would keep working.

There was a guy named Fernando who hung around the harbor and acted as a kind of facilitator, trying to make a buck off of cruisers any way he could. He claimed at various times to be a tour guide, fuel supplier, customs liaison, car rental agent, yacht agent, agents’ agent, et cetera. He told us he could provide any type of product or service that we might desire at the best possible price. He said his price for tours was a fraction of the other guides. Fernando seemed a little shady but basically a nice guy, and after we had asked around about him decided to take him up on his offer to tour the park.

He was waiting at the ecotourism dock when we stepped off the water taxi. “Good morning my friends,” he said. “How did you sleep?”

“We didn’t, much,” Cheryl said. “Sea lions were banging into our hull all night long.”

“Yes, it is because of your anchor light. It attracts the small fish they eat. Turn off the light and they will stop. It is no problem.”

“I don’t think I’d feel too safe without an anchor light,” I said. “There’s a fair bit of traffic coming and going at night.”

“You must learn to sleep with the noise, then,” he said with a smile. “Absolutely.”

He led us to an old white Toyota four-door sedan that was a bit the worse for wear and asked us to get in, then disappeared around the corner of a building across the street. A short man who’d been sitting on a nearby bench walked to the car and got into the driver’s seat. He turned slightly and said, “Hello, my name is Oscar, I am your tour guide.”

“I thought Fernando was our guide,” Cheryl said.

“Fernando is my agent,” Oscar said. “He finds tourists for taxi drivers. For us tour guides.”

“I’m Randy, and this is my wife, Cheryl.”

“Mucho gusto, I am very happy to meet you. You will expect a magnificent tour.”

Oscar drove us up the side of the volcano, past three giant wind generators that provide half the electricity to the island. As we climbed higher, the air grew chilled and misty. We were driving into cloud. At the summit we pulled over by the trailhead of the path leading up toward the crater of the El Junco volcano. After a long climb that left us huffing we stood at the lip of the crater. Not the empty pit of what I thought of as a typical volcano, El Junco’s crater was filled with rainwater that formed a clear mountain lake. Water from the lake is siphoned down the slope to the town of Baquerizo Moreno far below. It’s the only fresh water supply of any size on the island. The lake, in fact the whole setting, was beautiful and tranquil. The cool, moist air felt wonderful after months spent in tropical humidity at sea level.

“Oscar,” Cheryl said, “why do they call this volcano El Junco? That means ‘the junk’ in English, right, like a type of boat? Or maybe it can mean a rush, the plants that grow in water? That’s what our Spanish dictionary says.”

“Is just a name,” he said, shrugging. “It don’t mean nothing maybe. Maybe people throw their junk out here in the old days? You think a tour guide should know a better answer?”

“Couldn’t hurt. It’s really special up here though.”

“Yes, nice and cool. Muy verde, green. Next we go to the giant tortoise place. You will see some huge turtles there.”

A few miles down the road we pulled over beside a wooded area. Oscar directed us to get out and walk the trails in search of Galápagos giant tortoises. “Keep your eyes open,” he said. “You will see some big guys here. Some of them weigh almost four hundred kilos.”

This was a conservatory for the reptiles, used to study their habits and promote repopulation of the island. The tortoises have been decimated over the past three hundred years, primarily by passing sailors and early settlers. In the seventeenth century pirates started using the islands as a base for attacking Spanish settlements on the South American mainland. They were the first westerners to discover that the huge, easy to capture tortoises were an extremely tasty source of protein. British pirate and explorer William Dampier wrote in 1697, “They are so extraordinarily large and fat, and so sweet, that no pullet eats more pleasantly.” A hundred years later Captain James Colnett of the British Navy wrote, “The land tortoise, which in whatever way it was dressed, was considered by all of us as the most delicious food we had ever tasted.” If that were not recommendation enough, it was soon discovered that they could survive onboard a ship, laid on their backs, for at least a year with neither food nor water (there is anecdotal evidence that some survived for two years). They quickly became well known as a highly desirable, portable and non-perishable source of fresh meat, unrivaled by any other for supporting long distance voyagers in style. It almost spelled the extinction of the species, and probably would have if the rugged interior of the islands hadn’t provided them some sanctuary. More than two hundred thousand are believed to have been taken before the turn of the twentieth century. That level of depletion, coupled with the fact that they don’t reach sexual maturity for almost twenty-five years, was more than the creatures could long endure. They are protected today, but even so, there is evidence that many have been poached in recent years.

We moved along the wooded paths on the lookout for the giants. We passed plaques that informed us that we were walking under the boughs of romerillo and scalesia trees, unknown anywhere else in the world, like so much life here.

“Look!” Cheryl whispered, pointing through the branches to a tortoise munching on leaves. “Look how big they are. You think that’s a big one or do they get a lot bigger?”





“I don’t know. He looks pretty big to me.”

“He reminds me of how a dinosaur would be, the slow way he moves. It makes him seem even bigger. Let’s look for some more.”

We picked up the pace, looking in the underbrush as we went. We came to a place where we spotted four of them close together, all standing high on their legs with their necks stretched into the bushes, pulling down clumps of leaves. One of them was easily twice the size of the first one we’d seen. We didn’t really know how to estimate his weight, but I thought it must be more than five hundred pounds, maybe a lot more.

After another hour spent wandering the trails we had spotted several more, none quite as large as the biggest one we had seen in the group. They were really impressive animals and we couldn’t stop watching them. It’s hard to explain exactly why we felt the way we did about them, but we both agreed it was something special to walk among these gentle giants that can live two hundred years. To think of it was mind-boggling. Some of them could have been alive at the time of the Louisiana Purchase, or during the reign of Napoleon. One of these animals might have already been a hundred years old before construction of the Panama Canal started. Reluctantly, we made our way back to the taxi. Oscar waited patiently.

“Wow, that was amazing Oscar,” Cheryl said. “Those big ones are really something.”

“Umm, big turtles. Now we will go to the tree house. It is very famous.”

We wound our way down a narrow mountain road, the air growing warmer and thicker as we descended. A litter of small piglets scurried from our path as the car came close.

“Rare Galápagos pigs,” Oscar said, pointing at the litter and giggling. “Found nowhere else.”

He pulled off next to a hand-lettered sign that advertised, among other things, a pirate’s cave, a restaurant and dance floor, a bar, and a tree house in the “oldest and biggest tree in the Galápagos set in an ecologic and peaceful environment”, all for an entry fee of fifty cents. How could we go wrong? It turned out to be quite an interesting stop. I don’t know if it was the biggest tree in the Galápagos, but it was a hell of a big tree, and indeed had a house—small by house standards but plenty big to be stuck up in a tree—nestled in its huge limbs. The house sported electricity, running water, a fully equipped kitchen, a working shower and flushing toilet. It could be reached by walking across a suspension footbridge from the road and there was a firehouse-style slide pole for dropping quickly down from the house into a bar on the ground level. The bar’s walls were constructed entirely of green glass beer bottles glued into place like bricks, their bottoms facing into the barroom. It was a unique and interesting arrangement. We never did find the pirate’s cave and I guess the restaurant was closed, but the environment was peaceful and ecologic enough.





“Next, marine iguanas,” proclaimed Oscar as he pulled away from the tree house and headed on down the road toward the coast. We puttered back through the edge of town and on around the coast to the airport. Passing the end of the runway, we creaked and groaned our way down an undulating, sandy road for half a mile until we reached Iguana Beach, which wasn’t really a beach at all but more of an outcropping of rock that jutted into the breakers. It was covered by dozens of big, scaled marine iguanas. We’d seen quite a few different species of iguanas throughout the tropics, and while none of them were what anyone would call attractive, these were an order of magnitude uglier than any we had seen before. They looked like miniature, fat dragons. Their heads were encrusted with great, horny scales and a row of spines stood straight up along their backbones, from head to tail. Long, sharp claws protruded from all four feet. They were a mottled dark brown, trending to black. They were so ugly they were almost, but not quite, cute. They seemed to have no fear of man, allowing us to approach within just a few feet before first spitting streams of seawater at us and then ambling away. We got some great photos.





Oscar said it was time to end the tour and go to Fernando’s restaurant for the included lunch. As we crossed back under the glide path at the end of the runway a white hen ran squawking and flapping in front of the car.

“Galápagos chicken,” Oscar cackled.

“Let me guess,” I said, “found nowhere else in the world.”

“Exactly."

We’d had lunch in a few little restaurants in town in the past week and had looked at a few more, but still didn’t know which one was Fernando’s place. I asked Oscar where it was.

“At his house,” he said. “You will eat in his own kitchen. You will expect it to be very delicious.”

Oscar pulled up into the drive of a modest house at the edge of town. Fernando came out to meet us, asking about our tour. We had to admit it had been a good one; Oscar had been a competent enough guide, and certainly a pleasant one. Fernando beckoned us to a covered patio that had a couple of tables set up, not his kitchen at all but a small open air dining space. His wife and mother were cooking wahoo fillets just inside the open door. The fillets smelled wonderful as they sizzled in the skillet and soon we were eating them with stir-fried vegetables, soup and rice, followed by a large bowl of fresh fruit salad. It was a superb lunch and a pleasant surprise.

Fernando turned out to be full of surprises. He brought out what he called the visitors’ book, a big scrapbook filled with memos, photos and illustrations entered by the crews of cruising yachts that had visited Wreck Bay in years past. He was the current “keeper of the book” by default, and he took the responsibility seriously. The entries went back decades, to the days when only a handful of boats called at Wreck Bay in an entire year. We studied it with great interest. It contained recent entries by a few crews that we knew personally as well as some older ones by sailors we knew only by their reputations and fame within the cruising community. We added our own entry and thanked Fernando for sharing the book with us. We had gained a new respect for him and I felt a little ashamed that my first impression of him had been less than fully favorable.

We spent the following days exploring and enjoying the slow pace of life in town, eating in quaint little restaurants, sending off emails from Internet cafes, visiting the areas of the park that we could reach on foot, taking photos and topping up on provisions for the big “puddle jump” to Polynesia. I decided I wanted to swim with the sea lions before we left. They seemed so playful, I thought it would be a blast to interact with them. Cheryl, having more sense than I do, opted out. I pulled on my thin shorty wet suit and dived off a rock ledge into a sea lion filled bay across the hill from the harbor. When I hit the frigid water I thought my heart would stop. Once I recovered enough to move my limbs I kicked back to shore and dragged myself out. I had known the water would be cold but hadn’t expected it to be quite that cold. Cheryl had a good laugh and once I got my breath back I laughed with her. That was the end of my swim with sea lions.

We topped up on diesel, which we were able to buy at the subsidized price of $1.02 per gallon, the lowest we had paid since the twenty-three-cent fuel we took on in Venezuela. Our only regret was that we still had so much expensive fuel left from Panama that we didn’t have much capacity left. We bought yet another five-gallon plastic jerry jug to tie on deck and filled that as well as our tank. I figured that gave us a range of about seven hundred miles under power at econo-cruise speed if the wind should die and we tired of waiting for it to fill in.

The boat was still filled to the gunwales with staple foods but we topped up on fresh produce, all we could possibly eat before it spoiled, and then some. This was our last chance to buy anything for weeks. How many weeks we weren’t sure but we knew we didn’t want to run out of food in the middle of the ocean. One of the things we bought was a big stalk of bananas, still all green. The vendor lady assured us that if we hung them somewhere in the rigging they would last for at least two weeks because they would ripen from the bottom first, starting in a few days, and the last to ripen would be the ones on the very top. There must have been a hundred small bananas in the stalk. That shopping trip was the last order of business before we set sail. We went home and hung our big banana stalk from the backstay and stabilized it with some lines to the wind generator and solar panel mounting poles to keep it from swinging around too much.





We weighed anchor at first light the next morning, Monday, the twenty-sixth of May, and headed out of Wreck Bay for the first and probably last time ever. It had been a fascinating way to see an extraordinary place, unique in the world. It wouldn’t be true to call it our favorite destination ever but it was certainly wonderful and will always hold a special place in our memories and our hearts. I wouldn’t have missed it for anything.





The Pond





It’s just over three thousand nautical miles from Wreck Bay to Taiohae Bay on Nuku Hiva. That’s the great circle distance, a straight line across the ocean. The actual distance sailed will always be more. How much more depends on how much “wobble” there is in your course and how far you intentionally deviate from the route while searching for wind, or seeking a more favorable current, or avoiding nasty weather. Our voyage started off with a detour, one that we’d planned, even though we knew it would tack on at least one day, more likely two, to our passage.

While we were not permitted to actually stop anywhere else in the Galápagos after clearing out, nothing prevented us from sailing close along the shoreline and taking in the sights while we were still in this trove of natural wonders. We sailed a meandering path through the islands, crossing the mouth of Academy Bay on Isla Santa Cruz in mid-afternoon on the first day out. We could see a handful of distant sailboats anchored in the bay as we passed. Some of them were friends of ours. Like us, they were the stragglers, starting their voyage across the Pacific late in the season.

The sun slipped below the horizon and the wind dropped away to calm as Caribee entered the wide channel between Isla Isabela to port and tiny Isla Pinzón to starboard. We chose not to start the engine, as we would have normally done, instead drifting through the night in order to see as much of Isabela as possible in daylight the next day. With sails furled we slept and stood watch in turns while a favorable current carried us slowly up the channel.

Dawn rewarded us with a fabulous view of the vast solidified lava flows that cascaded from Isabela’s volcanic peaks and flowed down to the sea. Scrubby vegetation grew between the flows, but wherever the molten rock had streamed everything in its path had been incinerated or covered, leaving only stark, black flatness in its place. Each successive volcano was higher than the last as we glided up the east coast, ending with mile-high Volcan Wolf, directly on the equator near the island’s northern tip. Isabela has six volcanoes, all but one of them still active, making it one of the most volcanically dynamic places on earth.





It wasn’t only Isabela’s topography that was extraordinary. We were sailing through a naturalist’s dream. A pod of dolphins came rushing toward the boat and played in our bow wake. Vast flocks of blue-footed boobies power-dived into shoals of unsuspecting fingerlings that swam along the rugged shore, the rapid-fire zoop of their sleek bodies splitting the surface like bullets. Two spotted eagle rays leaped high into the air and slapped the water with hard belly flops. Isabela’s rich animal, bird and marine life are beyond compare, easily the most prolific and unique in the Galápagos. We would have preferred to have made our single stop there instead of on Isla Cristóbal, but at the time the port captain was only allowing boats to stay for three days in Puerto Villamil.

Just after noon some dark shapes broke the surface off our port bow. It looked like another pod of dolphins. I pointed them out to Cheryl.

“They’re too big to be dolphins,” she said. “Look how far away they are. I think they’re whales. Take us over there and see if they’ll let us get close.”

I pushed the tiller down and headed toward them while she ducked below to grab the whale identification book and a camera. It looked like there were four or five surfacing and diving shallowly as they swam, but when we got closer there were only two still visible.

“They look like pilot whales. They’re the right size and their heads are shaped like these,” she said, pointing to one of the drawings. “Head up. Point higher, they’re getting away!” She was practically squealing with excitement. This was the closest we had ever been to whales, even if they were a relatively small species. I pointed higher and sheeted in the sails. I didn’t want to start the engine in case it might scare them away. We gradually gained on them, snapping photos as we closed the gap. They let us get within two boat lengths before veering away slightly, keeping us at a safe distance. I looked from the whales to the book and back. They did look more like pilot whales than any of the others shown, so we put them down as such in the log. They watched us with their big whale eyes as we watched them back. After a few minutes they tired of the game and sounded. We didn’t see them again.





By late afternoon we were once more approaching the equator, this time from the south. We debated the need to toast King Neptune again, and since it was almost happy hour anyway, decided to respect the tradition. When we departed Panama we’d figured to make only one crossing, but this one technically made four and we still had one left to go.

Back in the northern hemisphere again we rounded Punta Albemarle at the top of the island just before sunset in strong, gusting winds typical of high-elevation capes. As soon as the sun dropped below the horizon it was like somebody flipped a switch, instantly shutting off the wind. Unfortunately, there was a long, lazy swell working up from some distant southern storm, and with no wind in her sails Caribee rolled like a pig. We gave up on the idea of once more drifting overnight to get a good daytime look at the west coast. I fired up the Kubota and got us moving at slow speed to conserve fuel in case we should need it farther into the voyage. Motoring didn’t exactly stop the rolling, but combined with a reefed, tightly sheeted mainsail, reduced it enough that we at least wouldn’t be pitched out of our bunks as we slept. After just a few hours the wind filled in enough that we could hoist sails and kill the engine. We’d hoped to stay close to Isabela for another day, but the southerly wind forced us to sail west, away from the Galápagos but in the general direction of the Marquesas. The very next night the Cerro Azul volcano on the southwestern corner of Isabela erupted in a fiery display that lit up the night sky, but by then we were nearly two hundred miles away and never even saw its loom. It was the volcano’s first eruption in a decade.

I was still on watch when the eastern sky started to lighten. Cheryl was catching some sleep in her sea berth. We have never been too keen on the rigid watch-standing schedules that many cruising couples employ, such as six hours on and six hours off. We prefer to simply stand on until fatigue forces us to wake the off-watch, however much time has passed. This works well for us because I’m a natural night owl and Cheryl is a morning person who doesn’t much like night sailing anyway. I usually start my watch a few hours after sunset, and even with some napping I get sleepy before sunrise. I will normally just tough it out until daylight, when I run through a maintenance and check-up schedule before handing over the watch. Our daytime routine is more relaxed and we often spend several hours awake at the same time.

When it was time for Cheryl’s watch I tried to wake her gently rather than jolting her awake by starting the engine. “Hey, sleepy head, the sun’s about to come up, you wanna see it?” She stretched her arms and yawned.

“Is it clear?”

“Stars everywhere. Just a few popcorn clouds around. It’s gonna be beautiful.”

“Okay, I wanna see it.”

“Guess what? We’re back in the southern hemisphere. You were sleeping when we crossed, so I figured you wouldn’t mind if I performed the ceremony by myself.”

“You got that right.”

“I need to run the engine for a while, of course,” I said. “Since you’re awake I’ll go ahead and start it.”

“Why don’t you wait til the sun’s up? I’d like to have peace and quiet for the sunrise. I’ll put on some coffee and be out in a minute.”

“Coffee’s already started but you better hurry or you’ll miss the sunrise.”

We typically run the engine for an hour each day on passage, and the sunrise change of watch is a good time for it. Assuming we’ve had enough wind to sail through the night and have not had to motor, the battery voltage will be at the lowest point of the day, especially when sailing downwind. That’s because when sailing off the wind (except in very windy conditions) our wind generator is nearly useless due to low relative wind speed, and even if the previous day was sunny, our array of solar panels won’t have pumped in enough energy to overcome the extra electricity burned off by running the navigation lights and radar all night. I also like to keep our somewhat smallish fresh water tank topped up in case the reverse osmosis watermaker should fail, which would force us onto a strict water-rationing regimen for the rest of the passage. The high-pressure pump that powers the watermaker is belted off the engine, so an hour spent idling along with the propeller engaged is a fuel efficient way to increase our sailing speed by at least a knot, make twenty gallons of fresh water and charge the battery banks.

I like to use the morning change of watch to lubricate the Aries self-steering vane (which will have been working around the clock), to take a look around to make sure nothing shook loose from the rigging during the night (no cotter pins on deck), to check that the sails are setting well and there’s no excessive chafe occurring, and to generally make sure that all is well on board. If we’re low on fresh fish I’ll set out a couple of heavy mono-filament lines with lures attached and pull them all day or until we have caught enough fish to last a while.





This morning I had an extra task. I wanted to get us back closer to a proper track, which meant pointing higher to get some extra south into our course. The wind was light and still west of south, no doubt an effect of the inter-tropical convergence zone, the ITCZ, also known as the doldrums. We were hopeful that the winds would be stronger and more easterly the farther we got from the equator. Not only were we north of the wind zone but due to our little diversion around Isabela we were a hundred miles north of the great circle route from San Cristóbal to Nuku Hiva. We needed to be at least two hundred miles farther south, where we expected to start picking up the southeast trades.

As the Kubota ticked over and our water tank and batteries began to fill I sheeted the sails still more and tweaked the Aries to a new course. Caribee sailed off to the southwest at good five-and-a-half knots, but I knew that as soon as I killed the engine and we lost that extra boost we wouldn’t be able to hold either the course or the speed. We’d just have to continue on to the west unless we burned some diesel to get south, and I wasn’t prepared to sacrifice the fuel for that yet. After the water tank was full I killed the engine and watched our speed drop to four knots as the bow fell off again. There was nothing for it. I set out the fishing lines and turned the ship over to Cheryl.

“Your watch,” I said. She was finishing the last of the banana muffins she’d made before we’d left port.

“Look at that sky,” she said. “Just gorgeous. I love sailing when it’s like this and the seas are smooth. I hate bad weather.”

“I know it.”

“It really is flat out here, huh?”

“Yeah. Hopefully the seas will stay down but we could really use more wind.”

“Did you see any ships?”

“No traffic all night, again. The radar is asleep in watchman mode, set to wake up and scan every twenty minutes. You can set it shorter if you want, but I’d just leave it. Sails are trimmed. The Aries is steering well. All good. Don’t let us fall off too much if you can help it. I’ve got two lines trailing rubber squid lures. Just check them for weed every now and then.”

“Okay, get some sleep,” she said. “I’m going to listen to the Central American Breakfast Club ham net if we can still hear it. I’m not even going to try to check in though, too far away. I doubt I’ll check in on the ANZAC either, unless somebody calls us. I’ll keep the volume down so maybe it won’t wake you up.”

“I’ll put in earplugs. Put on a harness and clip on when you’re in the cockpit, okay?”

“Okay.”

“You’re lying, aren’t you?”

“No. Okay, I might be lying a little bit. I probably won’t wear it.”

“Well, at least put the whistle around your neck. I won’t wear earplugs so I can hear if you blow it.”

Most non-sailors think that the farther you are from shore, the more danger you’re in. That’s wrong in most cases. Any safety gained from being near a port is generally more than cancelled out by the increased navigational hazards near land. Landsmen tend to think that the biggest offshore dangers are from things like storms or giant waves, but those are usually down the list a way, especially for tradewind passages. I think the biggest danger on a small boat at sea is simply falling overboard. It’s the most common calamity, at least the most common fatal one. The reason is because it’s so easy to become complacent about moving around on deck. After all, that’s where you live a good part of your life and it’s familiar, so you feel comfortable. I’ve noticed that most man-overboard situations, at least the ones we know about, happen in calm conditions, when sailors are most likely to let their guard down. It takes very little to make you lose your balance and end up in the drink, which is why I don’t like to sleep while Cheryl is on deck without a safety harness, its lanyard clipped to a strong point. There can be few things more frightening than waking up and finding yourself all alone onboard, with no idea when or where your mate fell over—except maybe treading water while your only hope of survival sails over the horizon, its crew blissfully unaware of your plight. I understood why she didn’t want to wear a harness. I don’t like wearing them either and usually don’t. They’re cumbersome, uncomfortable and irritating, and I believe they add to the danger in some ways, mainly by making it more difficult to move around quickly. I prefer to rely on the old “one hand for the ship, one hand for yourself” method. I’ve never fallen overboard (yet) but am very aware of how easy it would be, in part because I’ve had a few close calls. I try to think of the edge of the deck as a thousand-foot-high cliff and remember that if I fall over there’s a good chance that the end result will be much the same as if it were. Even if a fall happens in daylight with the other person watching successful recovery can be an iffy proposition. At a speed of six knots a swimmer will be six hundred feet behind the boat in one minute. At a distance of only three hundred feet a person’s bobbing head can easily disappear from view in even moderate ocean waves, and once visual contact is lost it is seldom regained. Staying on the boat is priority number one.

On the first day of June the trades finally filled in with authority. Sunrise found us broad reaching on a port tack in fifteen knots from the southeast, making better than six knots under working jib and main. We were 144 miles south of the equator when I submitted our daily position report through the Winlink ham radio email system. The sky was clear, the following seas moderate at around five feet. The wind vane was holding Caribee dead on course and she was romping toward the Marquesas with a bone in her teeth.





We hadn’t encountered any shipping traffic since leaving the Galápagos so had gotten sloppy about watch-standing and taken to sometimes sleeping through the night, depending mainly on the radar’s alarm to warn us of any targets in our vicinity. Considering that collision is probably the second biggest risk to life when sailing offshore, it’s not a recommended practice, but it certainly is more restful than staying up all night. Consequently, we were refreshed and in good spirits. I rationalize the lapse by claiming that a well-rested sailor makes better decisions than a fatigued one, which enhances safety.

Cheryl was beginning to get over her on-again, off-again seasickness and was working in the galley one morning, boiling water for a pan of oatmeal. I was patiently waiting for breakfast while lying in my bunk, listening to the ANZAC net, an SSB radio network set up by cruisers currently crossing the Pacific from the Americas and headed toward Australia or New Zealand.

Caribee abruptly snap-rolled to starboard. Pans clattered to the floor as Cheryl jumped away from the galley stove and screamed. I popped up to see oatmeal all over the cabin sole and Cheryl looking at her hand and grimacing in pain. The roll had thrown the pan off the stovetop and some of the boiling, sticky oatmeal had hit her hand before she could jump clear. The galley range is gimbaled and the pan was restrained by potholders, but it wasn’t enough.

“Are you okay?”

“It hurts,” she said, “I don’t know how bad it is.”

“Sit down, let me look.” I took a cloth wetted with cold water and wiped her hand, then examined it closely. “I don’t think the burn is serious, first degree probably. I know it hurts but I don’t think you’ll lose the skin.”

“It got my left shoulder and ear, too.”

I saw that her shoulder and ear were both red, but not blistered. I took some ice cubes from the freezer, put them into two quart-sized Ziplock bags and wrapped them in dishtowels. I held one to her shoulder while she held the other to the burn on her hand. I adjusted the pillow on her bunk so she could lie down with the ice pack while I opened the abandon-ship bag and pulled out a tube of silver sulfadiazine cream. The sulfa cream was probably unnecessary but I figured it couldn’t hurt. I gave her some ibuprofen and diazepam with a cup of wine, then rubbed a little of the cream on her burns.

“I don’t think it’ll get infected. It looks like the skin will stay on but we’ll watch it and start antibiotics at the first sign of trouble,” I said.

“It feels better. The ice is helping. I’ll just rest for a while. Looks like you’ll have to clean up the mess by yourself. Sorry.”

“That’s okay. I’ll clean up and then make us some breakfast.”

“I guess I just wasn’t paying attention,” she said. “I didn’t expect her to roll so fast.”

“Yeah, I don’t know what that was about, just an extra big wave I guess.”

“Maybe you should put on some clothes before you start cooking.”

“Nah, I’ll just be extra careful. I doubt we’ll get another roll like that, but I’ll be ready for one. I’ll stand off to the side of the stove a little.”

We, like many cruising couples, never wear clothes offshore in the tropics except in foul weather. After all, there’s nobody else around to see you and there are practical reasons for sailing nude, the main one being that it drastically cuts down on dirty laundry, always an issue on long passages. It’s a lot more comfortable, too. But more than that, it’s just a great feeling of freedom that dovetails nicely with the physical distance from land and the emotional distance from the constraints of society. You also get rid of those unsightly tan lines. Just remember to watch out for hot food flying around the galley.

The oatmeal incident does highlight the danger of injury and sickness offshore, always a concern for voyagers. Like most long-distance cruisers, we’re prepared for a variety of medical emergencies, within reasonable limits. We carry a variety of first aid gear, antibiotics, painkillers and medical supplies, along with books and digital files on treatment techniques. We can suture wounds, splint broken bones and treat infections and burns. It’s essentially first aid but it’s important to be as self-sufficient as possible when help is so far away.

Ten days at sea. It was another milestone for us and we were growing quite comfortable with our daily routine, or more accurately, our lack of one. We’d now given up entirely on all-night watch standing and in truth we weren’t standing a proper watch during the daytime either, the full time radar watch notwithstanding. There still hadn’t been any shipping traffic, not a single vessel, and we were falling into the trap of thinking that there wouldn’t be any all the way across the ocean. After all, the ocean is huge and our boat so small; what are the chances of being run down so far from the shipping lanes? I’m sure some sailors reading this will be appalled, and they’re not wrong, but what can I say, we don’t always do everything we should. Oddly, single-handed sailors never seem to be chided for improper watch standing, though they are by definition guilty of it on every long voyage.

In lieu of standing a constant watch we read books, watched DVD movies, fiddled with the fishing lures, cooked meals, made love, tweaked sails, talked on the SSB and ham radio nets, exchanged emails via Winlink, and generally enjoyed lazy days of trade winds sailing. The rock-steady winds required minimal course and sail adjustments. It had been an idyllic passage thus far, Cheryl’s occasional bouts of seasickness notwithstanding. At least her burns were not serious and had healed nicely.

We hadn’t caught a fish in days and were getting low on fresh meat, but were facing an acute banana glut. The colossal stalk we’d picked up in San Cristóbal was ripening with a vengeance. The lady who sold them to us said they would start to ripen from the bottom and work their way up the stalk, lasting for weeks. The theory worked as described for the first few days but then they all started to turn at the same time and soon we were each eating a dozen bananas every day in a vain effort to keep up. We were sick of bananas but loath to throw them overboard because we knew we’d have no more fresh fruit for two or three weeks once they were gone.

Cheryl was nominally on watch one evening a couple of hours after sundown when thumps against the hull made us both jerk bolt upright. Something solid was peppering the boat with hundreds of hard smacks. I thought it was hailstones.

“What is that, rain?” Cheryl asked.

“No, too solid.”

She scampered out into the cockpit and immediately starting screaming. “Aaaeee! They’re hitting me in the face.”

“What is it?” I ran out the companionway behind her. I was instantly struck in the mouth with a...fish? I wiped blood from my lip as Cheryl covered her head with her hands and ducked into the lee of the weather cloths. I grabbed a flashlight as another one hit me in the side of the head. The light’s beam revealed five or six flying fish, big ones, flopping in the cockpit. They were still coming, hitting the mast and sails, falling on deck in thrashing drifts. It was all over in half a minute, except for the two dozen still flopping around on deck, some bouncing back into the water but most flailing helplessly, high and dry. I scooped up several of the bigger ones and threw the rest overboard. We’d had flying fish in restaurants in Barbados years before, where they’re considered a delicacy. We considered them just tolerable then, not really our favorite fish. Still, I figured we might fry them up if we didn’t catch something tastier soon. I stuffed them into a Ziploc bag and stuck them in the refrigerator.

The next morning I decided to try something I’d read about, hoping to change our luck. I twisted a large fishhook to a wire leader and connected it to one of our heavy monofilament lines, then hooked it into one of the flying fish, so that it would pull forward like a lure. I next wired its wings out to its sides with leader wire, in the position they would be in if the fish were flying. I dropped it over the side, letting it trail back about two hundred feet. It skipped in and out of the water.

I was sitting in the cockpit in the shade of the Bimini just before lunchtime, reading a book and glancing at the horizon from time to time. The starboard-side line suddenly went taut and snapped loose from the clothespin that I used to pin it to the lifeline—a simple but effective alarm.

“Fish on!” I yelled as I jumped to my feet and dug my fish-handling gloves out of a cockpit locker.

Cheryl bolted into the cockpit as I grabbed the Cuban yo-yo, a plastic, doughnut-shaped spool that we use for winding up and storing fishing line.

“Get the syringe and the alcohol,” I said.

She went back below to grab the bottle of isopropyl and fill the syringe. We had learned that the best way to deal with a large thrashing fish in the cockpit was to quickly sedate it by squirting alcohol into its gills. A squirt on each gill and the fish would go to sleep in seconds. It also helped if you covered their eyes with a towel so they couldn’t see what you were about to do to them. We thought it was a big improvement over our old method, which consisted of holding the fish down and clubbing it to death with a billy, usually a hectic, two-person operation. The club got the job done but made the cockpit look like a slaughterhouse floor. We sometimes found specks of dried blood spatter in the nether corners weeks after boating and bashing a particularly green fish.

I held the spool in my left hand and pulled in short lengths of line with my right, winding the slack onto the spool after each pull. From the load on the line it felt like a good-sized fish. I took in an arm’s length of line at a time, quickly winding the slack onto the spool before pulling in another length. It was slow going. After a few minutes the fish was close enough that we could see its colors through the water. It had the distinctive golden hues of a mahi-mahi, what we used to call a dorado, or dolphin, in the Caribbean. It’s one of our favorite pelagic fish.

“It’s a mahi, don’t lose him,” Cheryl cried. This was the critical point and we both knew it. Past experience had taught us that as soon as the fish got a close look at us it would go berserk. If it was going to throw the hook, this would be when it happened.

“Have the gaff ready. If its not too big I’ll try to pull it straight onboard with the hook. Otherwise, I’ll give you the line and I’ll gaff it. Better get your gloves on.”

I had developed an effective technique for landing a fish up to about thirty pounds without using a gaff. This was partly out of necessity because of our ineptitude with the gaff, but when it worked, it was dead easy. I would wait until the fish momentarily tired of pulling away to the side, and when it turned in the direction of the boat I would start hauling in the line hand-over-hand as fast as I could pull it in, letting the excess slack fall into the cockpit. The fact that the fish was pointed directly toward the boat meant that if I kept tension on the line it couldn’t pull against me, and I would use its momentum against it. I would wait until its energy carried it almost to the boat and then pull up as hard as I could when I was standing directly over it. With luck, one hard pull would propel the fish up out of the water and into the cockpit, where it would land banging and slamming.

That’s the way it worked this time. I jerked with all my might and the fish zipped cleanly out of the water and into the boat in one fluid motion. It was a bull mahi, with the distinctive protruding forehead of the male. He landed in the cockpit with a heavy thud. Cheryl was ready with a thick bath towel. She flung it over the slippery, flailing bull and threw her weight onto him to quell his slamming. I grabbed the syringe, pulled the towel back to expose his head, and squirted shots of alcohol onto both sets of his gills. He stopped bucking instantly. Within seconds, his skin started to change colors, from golden yellow to brilliant dark blue, the spectacular transformation of a mahi-mahi in its death throes.

I took out the fillet knife and gave it a few swipes across the sharpening block, then went to work. The boat rolled in the following seas. The cockpit sole was already slippery with fish slime. I was sliding around, trying to work while holding the fish in one hand and the knife in the other, with no free hand to steady myself. It didn’t feel very safe. I, and everything else in the cockpit, would soon be covered in fish blood and tiny mahi scales, but when I was finished we would have at least several day’s worth of delicious fillets. I estimated the fish to weigh thirty-five pounds.

As soon as I started handing fillets down to Cheryl she carved off a piece, dipped it in a mixture of wasabi paste and soy sauce and popped it into her mouth. She groaned with pleasure. She loves it best when it’s still quivering. I prefer mine cooked.

We now had a glut of fresh fish. First with the bananas and now with the fish, it’s always feast or famine it seems. Our small freezer was still half full of steaks from Panama, and we probably wouldn’t be able to eat what we could refrigerate before some of it spoiled. We decided to try drying some of the fillets, making fish jerky, the way some friends had told us they did it. I cut several thin strips, dipped them in soy sauce and rolled them in salt. Then I strung a length of sail thread through them and hung them in the wind and sun over the lazarette deck aft of the cockpit. We would know in a few days how it worked.

The winds continued to be light. Our speed was slow. On the seventh of June we logged the lowest daily distance so far, only eighty-two miles noon to noon, even after hoisting our ultra-lightweight asymmetrical spinnaker. The spinnaker didn’t do much to help our speed but did have a profound effect on our motion. It was like magic. As soon as the big sail ballooned out the boat felt rock steady and the heavy roll we had suffered for days turned into a slow, gentle rocking. From then on we flew it anytime the wind was light enough, and a few times when it really wasn’t.

We continued to check in every afternoon on “The Pac Sea” as it’s fondly called, the Pacific seafarers’ ham radio net. We talked to net controllers in Hawaii, New Zealand, Australia and California. Cheryl usually answered the roll call of vessels on passage because she’s a lot more radio active than I, but sometimes I would do the honors if she was tired or just didn’t feel like it. It was a part of our daily routine now, a rhythm of life at sea that was becoming comfortable and predictable. Every voyage of more than a few days develops its own unique rhythm and we were well into that phase now. We were in our own little independent world, hundreds of miles from any land, from any authority, with complete freedom and minimal contact with the outside world, and even that only if we wished it. This was of course the longest passage we had ever made and I felt peaceful and content in a way I never had before.

Sadly, that contentment didn’t seem to last, which is the nature of contentment I guess. I noticed a subtle change in my emotions one day, the first twinges of what I recognized as dread. At first I didn’t fully understand what exactly it was I dreaded, but as we crossed more meridians and time zones on our way westward I realized that it was our impending landfall that was the cause of my disquiet. When we left Panama we had both been excited by the idea of landfall in the South Pacific islands, the storied and romantic Marquesas. Now that it was an approaching reality I could only think that I didn’t want this voyage to be over. We’d both been a little apprehensive about the length of the passage before we set out, afraid that the time and distance would weigh on us. In fact, the opposite was the case, at least for me. Out here, we were masters of our world, insulated from intrusions, lords of all we surveyed, beholden to no man. If there were surprises they weren’t dealt up by the hand of others but by nature, or fate. It felt like the most natural thing in the world to just sail on, ever westward, one day blending into the next, with no responsibilities except driving the ship and staying in harmony with the elements. Of course it couldn’t last. Once we made port the first order of business would be dealing with officials, the most onerous part of cruising under the best of circumstances. No, I didn’t miss land, not at all, not now, but I knew in my heart that I’d miss the freedom of the sea once I stepped onto the beach.

We made radio contact with friends Tim and Isabel on the catamaran Camissa during the ANZAC net one morning. They were six hundred miles ahead of us, even though we had left the Galápagos before them. With their much greater speed they had gained a hundred miles per day on us, essentially doubling our pace, and somewhere along the way had overtaken us. Tim said they had stopped fishing because they had a tuna glut, but what they really longed for was some mahi-mahi. I shared my newly discovered flying fish lure techniques with him and the next morning he told us they had caught two nice mahi that afternoon. Apparently, flying fish are one of the main foods of mahi-mahi and they’ll hit them when nothing else is working. I told Tim about our mahi drying experiment, which had turned out to be a success. Three days after I hung the fish strips out to dry we sampled our first taste of “fish jerky”. It was surprisingly good, maybe a little on the salty side but quite a tasty and filling snack. After that we dried both tuna and mahi whenever we caught more than we could freeze or quickly eat.





On the thirteenth of June, our eighteenth day at sea, we were a thousand miles from Nuku Hiva and our approaching landfall was no longer feeling very abstract. The winds had gone even lighter and we flew the spinnaker almost full time, even at night. Even so, we barely made a hundred miles per day. The motion was gentle and we took advantage of the sunshine and lack of sea spray to do some laundry. We washed two sets of sheets and pillowcases and hung them on the shrouds and lifelines to dry in the sun. They were starting to feel a little salty even though we always took pains to make sure that we were clean and dry before climbing into our berths.

We were both steadily losing weight. We had noticed that we lost weight on passages before, but as we had never been on one as long as this were surprised at how thin we were starting to get. We were eating well. In fact, we were taking in more calories than we would have normally done, but still we shed pounds and firmed up. I have a theory that the reason people tend to lose weight at sea is because your body is working all the time, even while you sleep. The motion of the boat causes your muscles to flex whether you’re aware of it or not. I don’t know if that’s really true but I like the idea of it.

On day twenty, when we were still about seven hundred miles out, we spotted the lights from two ships during the night. They were in the far distance, beyond the range of our sixteen-mile radar, but we decided it was time to start keeping a better watch. We began to take turns at night again, but still slept through most of the watch, using the egg timer to wake up for a scan of the horizon every half-hour or so.

The very next night a vessel appeared on the horizon, headed in our direction. I watched for some time as it gradually closed the distance. I could see with binoculars that both her green and red navigation lights were visible at the same time, a sure sign that she was headed directly toward us. When she didn’t change course I hailed them on the radio.

“Ship on my starboard bow, this is the sailing boat Caribee on your bow, do you copy?” No response. I continued to hail them every minute or so as they bore down on us. Still no reply.

Cheryl woke up when she heard the unfamiliar sound of me hailing a vessel and asked with some concern, “What’s going on?”

“Some kind of ship headed toward us,” I said. “She’s all lit up, bright white lights everywhere. A big fishing vessel I suspect. They won’t respond. I’m going to head up and try to get out of her way.” We both went on deck and I altered course to port. At first it looked like she was going to pass to our starboard, but then she seemed to alter course had head straight toward us again.

“What the hell is she doing?” Cheryl asked.

“Looks like she’s changed course and heading toward us.” I hailed them again, “Vessel to my starboard, this is the sailing vessel Caribee on your bow, what are your intentions?” Silence. I headed up farther, and to our amazement, the ship changed course again, still heading directly toward us. “I know they can see us,” I said. “Get the Q-beam and plug it in, I’ll shine it on the bridge.” I was starting to get the uneasy feeling that they were trying to run us down, something I didn’t mention to Cheryl.

She brought up the million-candlepower spotlight and I flipped the switch, aiming toward the upper superstructure of the vessel where I thought the bridge would be. I hailed them again on the radio while holding the light in their eyes, then shining it on our sails, then back toward them. I finally got a response.

“China fishing boat, China fishing boat, China fishing boat,” a man’s voice yelled into the microphone.

“This is the sailing vessel Caribee. What are your intentions, what are your intentions? Do you intend to pass across our bow?”

“China fishing boat, China fishing boat, China fishing boat.”

“Oh hell, that’s probably all the English he knows,” I said. “I’m going to head up as much as I can with the spinnaker still up. It’s just about too late to try and snuff it now. Start the engine. If we can’t sail out of his way we’ll try to motor clear.”

I sheeted the spinnaker and main as far as I could and headed up until the spinnaker started to luff. I put the gearbox in forward and goosed the throttle. A glance at the radar display showed that the ship was within a quarter-mile and still closing. Way too close for comfort.

A few tense minutes passed as we motor-sailed to the south and the fishing boat came closer, but at an oblique angle now. It looked like they would clear us but not with much of a safety margin. After ten minutes they were directly alongside, only a hundred fathoms away, two hundred yards. We kept looking back and forth from the fishing boat to the radar to make sure he wasn’t going to change course and head for us again. A little more waiting and they were finally pulling ahead, getting farther away.

“Jesus, that was a little more excitement than I needed,” I said. “Well, I’m not sleepy now.”

“What do you think the helmsman was doing? It almost seemed like he was trying to hit us.”

“That’s happened before with a fishing boat, remember? I really think they just want to get a good look at a sailboat. Or maybe it had to do with their fishing lines or nets. Maybe they needed to make that turn to close a purse net. They probably don’t realize they’re scaring the hell out of us. Just because they know what they’re going to do next doesn’t mean that we do, but maybe they don’t think about that.”

“Well, I hope it never happens again,” she said.

On day twenty-five we were still sliding along under the cruising spinnaker, making little more than a hundred miles a day. We’d had the chute up for five days now, around the clock. It was a little unsettling to be sailing under spinnaker while we slept but our hourly checks always found the winds light and the sail setting perfectly. It didn’t make sense to drop it and kill what speed we had. The motion was very comfortable. Two days later we were only 147 miles out and knew we would likely spot the island the next day. Our secluded existence as lords of the universe was about to come to an abrupt end. Cheryl gave the call at noon.

“Land ho!”

I woke up and went out to look. It took me a while to distinguish the island peak from the hazy clouds, even with Cheryl pointing toward where I was supposed to look. I finally spotted it. A check of our position showed that we were twenty-six miles from the island but still fifty-two miles from Baie du Taiohae, the port of entry. We had weighed anchor in Wreck Bay twenty-eight days ago.

We entered the mouth of Baie du Controleur just as the sun dipped below the peaks of Nuku Hiva. Cheryl was on the bow taking in the verdant slopes while I steered from the cockpit.

“Look,” she said, “hammerheads. It’s a school of hammerheads.”

“A school?” I looked over the side and sure enough, there were five large hammerhead sharks swimming just beneath the surface in a single file formation. They paid us no heed as we motored past them in the still air and flat water of the bay. “I’ve never seen that before,” I said. We had seen individual hammerheads in the Caribbean but they were few and far between.

We eased slowly into the head of the bay, near the mouth of a small creek, to a spot where our copy of the Charlie’s Charts cruising guide recommended as the best anchorage. We dropped the anchor in twenty-nine feet of water over what the book said was a mud bottom. There wasn’t another vessel in sight. The large bay was remote and the shoreline sparsely inhabited. A few dim lights winked on ashore in the gathering darkness. The fecund, musty tang of humid earth hung in the air, pungent and strangely foreign to our sanitized olfactory senses, yet deeply, anciently familiar. Somewhere a distant dog barked, maybe warning his master of these intruders from the sea.

“Well, we survived the savage sea again,” I said, giving Cheryl a kiss as we stood together on the foredeck staring at the darkening land as if at an alien world.

“Can you believe we’re really here? Little Caribee brought us across an ocean. A big one.”

“It’s the start of a whole new adventure.”

“Let’s celebrate,” she said. “We don’t have any champagne so how about a glass of red wine?”

“How about a cold beer instead. It’s kind of bubbly.”

“Even better.”

“Maybe more than one.”





Tomorrow we would make our way over to Taiohae and deal with officialdom, the gendarmes and douanes. But not tonight. Tonight belonged to us. Tonight we would sleep soundly with no thought of standing watch, trimming sails or navigation. Tonight we would bask in the comfort of a still, quiet anchorage, our first in nearly a month.





Oceania





We’d sailed out Passe Teavanui and left the legendary island of Bora Bora slowly slipping out of sight in our wake five days ago and were now scanning the horizon for a glimpse of our next stop, Suwarrow Atoll, a tiny dot on the map of the sprawling Cook Islands. Our navigation showed that the easternmost motu was less than eight miles away but we couldn’t even see the tops of its palm trees yet. The passage gods were still smiling on us. This trip had been nearly perfect. A light following breeze pulled us along by our now standard red, white and blue spinnaker for most of the way. We finally stopped flying it only after it somehow blew out despite the benign conditions. It ripped in half right down the edge of a seam, from luff to leach, which was especially irritating because it was a relatively new sail, hardly used before our passage to Nuku Hiva.

We were still a little down about being expelled from French Polynesia, too. If we’d had our way we would have stayed a year, at least. The problem for us as Americans is that we are allowed only three months in the territory before we’re obliged to move on. The French and other citizens of the European Union don’t share this problem so it felt a little unfair. It’s not like FP is a small island group that you can cover in a few weeks. The territory is spread over an expanse half the size of the lower forty-eight United States. It would be impossible for anybody to cruise more than a small fraction of such a vast area in a mere ninety days, but we had given it our best shot. While some might have tried to make short visits to as many islands as possible, we took a different approach. We decided to focus on a few select places that we hoped would be representative of each island group and to experience those as fully as we could in the small amount of time we had.





Nuku Hiva and Ua Pou did not disappoint, even after years spent dreaming of a South Pacific landfall. We had, of course, seen iconic photos of the lush and jutting volcanic peaks of the Marquesas, so the breathtaking scenery was not exactly a surprise, but to actually look up and see those green and black giants towering overhead while anchored beside an exquisite, deserted beach was another thing altogether.





We had expected the scenery, but what we hadn’t fully anticipated was the warmth and generosity of the Polynesians. Everybody we met was friendly and helpful to a fault, even more so after they realized we didn’t speak French and didn’t come from the country that they, in their love/hate relationship with their colonial overlords, sometimes think of as their oppressors. At least our government hadn’t obliterated any of their atolls with nuclear weapons tests, like the French had done. We only did that to the Marshall Islanders. The gendarmes, too, were friendly, accommodating and surprisingly relaxed about entry procedures, much like their counterparts in the French Caribbean islands. Our limited French and the near-total absence of English speakers made it difficult to interact with people, and that we regretted, but both parties were usually able to get their points across and the bright smiles were easy enough to understand. Every time we walked the shaded paths and roadways folks offered us breadfruit, bananas and (our favorite) pamplemousse, a luscious citrus delicacy that just might be the finest of the many great things these islands have to offer.

Pamplemousse is closely related to grapefruit, but they’re not the same. Actually, the grapefruit is a hybrid, created by crossing a pamplemousse with an orange. Pamplemousse, or Citrus maxima (known in other places as shaddock, pommelo and lusho fruit) is at least half again bigger than grapefruit. Weighing as much as five pounds, it is, as its scientific name suggests, the largest of all citrus fruits, and to my mind is in all ways superior. The skin is greenish in color, the meat succulent, sweet and delicious with none of the sharp bite of a grapefruit. They’re loaded with vitamin C. Most people, upon trying one, wonder why anyone would intentionally set out to create a grapefruit when this was already available.





After a month in the high volcanic Marquesas Islands we set sail for the low atolls of the Tuamotu Archipelago, five hundred miles to the southwest. We spent most of our Tuamotu time at one atoll, Kauehi. I don’t remember why we chose that particular one, farther off the beaten path I think, which is funny when you think about how remote the whole group is. We were the only cruising boat in the south end of the lagoon during our time there, though we did meet a couple of others when we moved up to anchor off the little settlement for a few days. There was a tiny store up there and we were able to add some basic staples to our dwindling provisions, but the days of juicy pamplemousse were just a memory on these arid, sandy atolls. Very little agriculture is feasible so most of what is available is brought in from off island, mainly from Tahiti. The economy is based on black pearl oyster aquaculture and some low intensity fishing. We bought onions, potatoes, eggs, milk powder, flour, sugar and of course fresh baguettes, seemingly available in even the farthest reaches of the French empire, and apparently priced at the same low rate worldwide.

The allure of the Tuamotu atolls is all about what’s below the water’s surface, and the diving, snorkeling and fishing on Kauehi were excellent. We felt more relaxed in the water here; the visibility was better than in the Marquesas and the big, aggressive sharks that are common there didn’t seem to be around. Spider conch were abundant, and just as tasty as their Caribbean cousins, the queen conch. We dived for the wild black pearl oysters that we knew to be here, because friends had collected several just a year earlier. We rigged Liz for sailing and went on long, languid forays along the shores of the lagoon. We beach-combed the windward shore for hours at a time, discovering such treasures as fishing float balls, mismatched flip-flops, broken buckets and plastic objects of every description. It was a time of deep relaxation for us, a respite from months of constant passage making and rolling anchorages.





We’d picked up a hitchhiker on our passage from the Marquesas and he was still onboard. The pickup came as we were ghosting out of the lee of Ua Pou on a gentle breeze when Cheryl spotted a bird in the water, swimming in circles and lazily flapping its wings. She also saw fins circling around it.

“Sharks!” she yelled. “Go pick him up, go, there’s something wrong with him. Hurry, I don’t want the sharks to get him.”

As we edged closer she realized they weren’t sharks at all, but dolphins, swimming in a tight circle around a small black bird that definitely had something wrong with it. It looked like it was almost drowned, its head barely above the surface, its wings flapping weakly, splashing in the water. I steered as close alongside as I could and Cheryl was able to reach far enough over our low caprail to scoop it up on the first pass. The dolphins dispersed and swam away, as if their job of protecting the bird was now finished, the baton passed to us.

The bird was small to medium sized; a storm petrel as she reckoned after consulting her bird book, later refined to a Bulwer’s petrel upon consulting Wikipedia. It was missing a foot. Something had severed its leg just below the “knee”.

One of the things I love about Cheryl is her compassion for any animal in distress. She took the bird under her wing, so to speak, and started feeding it a steady diet of fresh fish, which we were lucky enough to be catching on a fairly regular basis. It ate hungrily. She nursed the bird until it had regained considerable strength. She kept it in a straw basket lined with soft cloths where it still lived when we reached Kauehi, five hundred miles downwind from its home. It was well fed but clearly miserable. After Cheryl ran it through its morning wing flapping exercises it spent the remainder of each day staring forlornly out to sea, longing for the freedom it used to have.

“We can’t just keep carrying the bird around,” I said. “You know that, right?” This wasn’t the first time we’d had this discussion.

“I know. I just want to make sure he’s strong enough to fly before we let him go.”





She continued with this bird convalescence routine for about three weeks after we reached the atoll until one day she decided it was now or never, we would release the bird and see what happened. We got into the dinghy with him, ready to start the motor and give chase in case an emergency rescue from the water was necessary. Then I took him in both hands and threw him up into the air as high as I could, into the wind. He started flapping his wings wildly, the first time he had used them to carry his weight in nearly a month, losing altitude the whole time and falling slowly down toward the sea. Another rescue appeared imminent, but just before he hit the water he started to gain altitude. He made two widening circles around the boat and then straightened out and settled on a course straight back toward the Marquesas. We watched as he held a steady line, finally disappearing from our sight. Of course we never knew what became of him, or her. The odds were long and stacked against him and saving a bird with a missing foot may not have been a kindness, but at least Cheryl felt like she had given him a chance. She likes to think that he reached home safely and lived happily ever after, bravely facing the daily challenge of life with one leg.

A few days after the freeing of the bird we felt we had seen the best that Kauehi had to offer and were ready to move on. We never did find those pearl oysters. On the way out we bought a few black pearls from the lady who ran the little store up at the settlement. Her husband owned an oyster farming operation out in the lagoon and she gave us a nice price.

Next stop, Tahiti. Tahiti is the economic and cultural hub of French Polynesia, the territory’s largest island, and home to two thirds of its two hundred and seventy-five thousand people. Papeete is the capital city and administrative center. It’s a small city but diverse and cosmopolitan, with a considerable resident population of French nationals and other foreign imports. You can actually buy things in Papeete, not merely basics and staples, but just about anything even the most discriminating consumer might desire, for a price. There was a modern Carrefour supermarket just a short walk from our anchorage offering exotic cheeses, Belgian and Swiss chocolates, fine wines, prime cuts of steak and other luxury products, but at prices that would make an OPEC oil sheik cringe. We had long since learned why French Polynesia is known as one of the most expensive countries in the world; in fact we had known it before leaving Panama, which was one of the reasons we had provisioned so heavily there. But this was the first time we had seen this quantity and selection of imported specialty foods in one place and the sticker shock was crushing. Still, we just had to have some of those things. The Brie and dark chocolates in particular were calling our names, so we found ways to rationalize our purchases despite the damage to our modest cruising budget. We hadn’t really spent that much money since leaving Panama, had we, and that was four months ago. We deserved a reward after all of that hard voyaging, and who knew when and where we might next find epicurean delights like these.





We knocked around old Papeete town for a few days, shopping in the open public market for fruits and vegetables, lunching on street food, window-shopping the latest French fashions and hanging out in the park across from the famous old basin where generations of cruising sailors, some legendary, had tied their yachts stern-to on the quay. After getting our city fix we sailed Caribee out Passe de Papeete, through the fringing reef and twelve miles across the Sea of the Moon to Baie de Cook, Moorea.

Moorea has been called the most beautiful island in the world by more than one traveler, and is arguably so, with its towering spires, emerald valleys, white beaches and turquoise waters sheltered behind a fringing reef of vibrant coral formations. We anchored just inside the pass to Cook’s Bay, behind the reef, over a patch of white powder sand.

All of the Society Islands, from Tahiti straight through to Bora Bora, seem built to order for cruising sailors. They each have a fringing reef that entirely encircles the island, with good anchoring depths in sand between the reef and the shore. Not only that, it’s usually possible to circumnavigate the islands while entirely in the protection of the reef, and to enter and exit at various passes to the sea along the way. Unlike in the Marquesas, which have deep water right up to the harbors, you almost never have a significant swell working into the anchorages, and unlike the low atolls of the Tuamotus, you have lush, lofty islands to explore.

We rented a motorbike and toured Moorea, traversing every kilometer of road we could find, from the cool, breezy top of four-thousand-foot Mont Tohive’a to the sweltering, windless western beaches. We bought a few more black pearls of better quality than the ones we’d picked up in Kauehi, but at a higher cost. After a couple of weeks in our dream anchorage the ticking of the visa clock prodded us to set sail for Bora Bora. Because of the time constraints, we stopped just once along the way, at Raiatea.

Bora Bora is another contender for most beautiful island in the world. We had a couple of weeks left on our visas when we entered Passe Teavanui and proceeded to anchor off the Bora Bora Yacht Club. The club had new owners, a young couple who were trying hard to attract foreign yachts. They kept a small fleet of bicycles that they loaned out to cruisers, and we made full use of two of them, riding all over the western shore, all the way down to the world renowned Bloody Mary’s Restaurant and Bar, with its walls covered in currency from around the world and its wooden signboards carved with the names of hundreds of famous past patrons—artists, actors, political leaders, astronauts and celebrities of every stripe. Of course we had to drink a few bloody marys and eat their signature “hamburgers in paradise”.





We used the bicycles to haul our purchases back from the supermarket, a less taxing operation than you might expect, since our shopping cart wasn’t exactly filled to the brim. I would not have thought it possible, but browsing the market shelves in Bora Bora made us long for the values to be found in the Papeete Carrefour.





Lazy days of cycling along the western shore road, new anchorages sampled, free-diving on the backside of the fringing reef—lovely all, but overlaid with an end-of-the-line melancholy. These would be our last days in French Polynesia. Our deadline loomed like a dark cloud. Though excited about adventures to come, looking upon Bora Bora’s loveliness was bittersweet, for we knew this would all soon be lost to us, perhaps forever.





◆◆◆



Suwarrow’s pass is hard to see until you’re very close because there’s no land immediately adjacent. We had been warned that the charts might be off, which meant that our electronic charts were likely off as well, out of position by some distance, possibly by more than a hundred yards. We reduced sail and fired up the engine, edging ever closer to what we judged to be the most likely location of the pass. Squinting into the afternoon sun, trying to distinguish between the dark blue of the pass and the pale blue and brown of the sandbar and reef, I was ready to put the helm down and spin around at the first hint of danger. After a few tense minutes I spotted the pass. Once identified its boundaries were sharp and clear, so we unfurled the jib and sped into the lagoon. Scooting south down the eastern side of Anchorage Island we rounded its south end and sailed up into its lee. We picked our way around until we found a patch that looked relatively free of coral bommies and dropped the hook. A school of blacktip sharks milled around the boat as we paid out the anchor chain. Two other sailboats lay to their anchors behind the island.

Suwarrow is a protected atoll. It was made a national park of the Cook Islands in 1978, primarily because of the rich bird and marine life it supports. There are no proper entry formalities when arriving in the Cook Islands at Suwarrow, you just check in with the park ranger when he is in residence, between May and November, more or less. At other times you don’t check in at all. There are no permanent residents on the atoll and it has only been intermittently inhabited throughout its history, most famously by New Zealander Tom Neale, who lived alone on Anchorage Island for a total of sixteen years during three different periods between 1952 and 1977 and wrote a well-known book about the experience, An Island to Oneself.

“Suwarrow Park Ranger, Suwarrow Park Ranger, this is Caribee,” I called on VHF. No reply. I called again and after a pause and got an answer.

“Caribee, this is John, over.”

“Hi John? Do you want to switch channels?”

“Welcome to Suwarrow. Just stay here, it’s fine.”

“Thanks. I wanted to ask if it’s okay if we wait until tomorrow to come in? We’re a little tired and don’t feel like launching the tender.”

“No problem at all, whenever you’re ready, we look forward to seeing you.”

Next morning we went in and met John and Veronica and their four sons, Jonathan, Jeremiah, Giovani and Tino, ages about seven to fourteen. John examined our passports as he sat shirtless in swim trunks, his bushy flyaway hair blowing in the stiff breeze. He jotted down the details in a notebook and that was that, easily the most informal entry we have ever made. He asked us to pay a fifty-dollar park fee and said we could stay as long as we wanted so long as we were “nice”. Officially, we were only allowed to stay two weeks, but John was the official. It was already October, less than a month until the beginning of cyclone season, so we didn’t expect to hang around too long anyway.

“This is the ranger’s residence, just a few years old,” John said. “It has solar panels and an electric water pump to raise the water from the cistern up to the gravity tank, so we have running water at the turn of the tap.” He was clearly proud of the building. It was simple but functional with a concrete floor that was also the top of the underground cistern. The lower level was open on three sides with a kitchen set off to the south end and an enclosed toilet and washroom on the east side. A large picnic style table dominated the open space. There was a stairway up to the upper level, which contained the sleeping quarters and private living space. Somebody had mounted a varnished driftwood plaque on the front of the building announcing the Suwarrow Yacht Club in letters engraved with a router. The flags of many nations were tacked up all around the open sides, traditional mementos from visiting yachts.





“This is really nice, it has everything you need,” Cheryl said. “Where did the rangers stay before they built it?”

“Mostly in Tom Neale’s old house,” he said, nodding toward a ramshackle plywood building a few feet away. Book Exchange was hand-lettered in blue paint on the wall next to the front door. John told us that we were welcome anywhere on Anchorage Island, where we were now, the biggest and highest of several small islets and motus, but that we shouldn’t move the boat to any other anchorage or go anywhere out of sight of the island in our dinghy unless we got permission. It was a measure designed to make sure none of the nesting birds or endangered giant coconut crabs were unduly molested. He said we were welcome to fish but should not clean fish on the boat because of the shark problem in the lagoon.

“Bring your fish ashore and clean them on that table. There are plenty of sharks in the lagoon and we don’t want them to get used to feeding in the anchorage. Somebody might get bitten while they’re swimming.”

Veronica led us out into the bush to the old underground cistern that Tom Neale had used to catch rainwater. She said it was a great place to do laundry.

“Just lower a bucket on a rope and pull up some fresh water,” she said. “There are a few thousand liters down there, and more every time it rains. It’s good enough to drink, so don’t pour the dirty water back in.” Veronica told us she washed their laundry in buckets right there beside the cistern and draped it over low bushes to dry in the sun and breeze. It seemed like a very good system. A copse of swaying coconut palms surrounded the clearing. It was the loveliest laundry we had ever seen. We would no doubt soon have a load or two to wash now that we were once again obliged to wear clothes.

On the way back out to Caribee we swung by the other anchored boats to meet our neighbors. They were Robert and Kim of Ram and Ike and Becky of Rhythm. That’s when we first heard that John’s family was facing something of a dilemma. They told us that John had just learned via his dodgy old high-frequency radio the disappointing news that there would not be a government boat coming to pick them up until at least December. They were already almost out of food and it would be at least several weeks before they would be taken off the island.

“Really, they have a food problem?” Cheryl asked. “They didn’t mention that.”

“It’s not their way to mention it, it would be like asking you for food,” Robert said. He told us that there was no boat available to transport them and their belongings to Raratonga now. The one they were expecting had broken down or something and there was not a backup.

“They catch all the fish they want and there’s coconut and breadfruit on the island and they still have rice and some flour and sugar, but that’s about it,” Kim said. “They try to conserve the coconut crabs. We have been giving them a little from our stores, but you know how it is. Most of us are provisioned for our own needs and may not be able to re-supply for some time.”

“And if they’re saying December that might really mean January or February if they operate like most island governments we’ve seen,” I said. “Well into cyclone season.”

“Afraid you might be right,” Robert said.

We spent the next couple of days hiking around Anchorage Island, beachcombing, doing some fishing—anything to delay starting the work of repairing the long, jagged rip in our spinnaker. Our friends Rick and Sue on Panacea arrived in the anchorage. We had last seen them in the Marquesas some three months earlier. We gave them an orientation tour of Suwarrow and that evening traded tales of the Tuamotus and Society Islands over sundowner cocktails. They were going to be leaving in a few days, headed for Pago Pago, American Samoa, and wondered if we might be able to join them there for the Thanksgiving holiday. We thought we probably would.

We carried our ripped spinnaker up to the front lawn of the ranger station and laid it out to survey the damage and start the repair. Once it was spread over the scrubby grass we could align the edges of the tear and stick them together temporarily with sail repair tape. Then we would carry the sail back to the boat where we planned to spend many hours stitching it up with our sewing machine.

A few boats came and went over the coming days, our little fleet’s numbers expanding and receding like the tides. The French boat Vagamar came in. Jim and Cindy aboard Summer Sky showed up. We had briefly met them somewhere before and talked occasionally on the ham radio. Another French boat, Three Oceans, arrived. Panacea left, followed by Rhythm. No more new boats arrived after that and one by one everyone departed until we were the only boat left in Suwarrow. That’s when we really became close friends with John, Veronica and their boys.





Giovanni and Tino, the two youngest, taught us their fishing secrets, mainly consisting of how to crack open the appropriated shells of hermit crabs and thread the crabs onto hooks for bait. But we quickly found that the real secret to fishing in the lagoon wasn’t hooking fish but getting them into the boat before the sharks took them. It was an amazing thing to watch. You could look down into the crystal water of the lagoon and see fish and sharks swimming together in apparent harmony, seemingly taking no notice of each other. But the instant a fish took a hook the sharks were all over it. A rod and reel would be utterly useless here. Your only chance of boating a fish was to use a hand line and start pulling it in hand over hand as fast as you could the instant you felt a strike. Then, you might have one chance in three of getting a whole fish and not just the head.





Jonathon and Jeremiah, the two oldest, taught us the many secrets of the coconut, which were more than we had imagined. The small-to-medium sprouting nuts can be harvested for heart of palm, delicious in salads or as a side dish. The even more newly sprouted nuts are filled with a light fluffy white center that is sweet and succulent, like a desert. And of course the water coconuts provide a refreshing and delicious drink. Veronica taught Cheryl the secrets of preparing various breadfruit and fish dishes, and how to make island style brooms from the long stiff fronds of a certain plant. We sent emails for John over our radio to Cook Islands government officials requesting clarification on when they might be picked up, then shared dinners and drinks in the evenings up at the ranger station and discussed the government’s lack of a reply. John would sometimes catch and cook a few coconut crabs, the giant and succulent crustaceans that were once ubiquitous in the south-sea islands but are now rare and endangered except in the most remote outposts. They were abundant in Suwarrow.

The family’s food supply was starting to get critical, notwithstanding the bounty of the sea and the island, which provided them a substantially adequate but unvarying diet. We’d shared some of our dwindling supply of fresh vegetables from Bora Bora, but those were now long gone. We gave them canned foods, rice and milk powder. For a treat, we gave them some packaged cookies and Cheryl baked an occasional chocolate cake, always a huge hit with the whole family. When they ran out of cooking oil, a critical component to many preparations, we gave them one of our two remaining liters of olive oil. After all, we were only about four days from being able to provision in Pago Pago whenever we finally decided to set sail. In return, they kept us well supplied with fish, coconut and breadfruit. One notable crisis came when they ran out of propane for their cook stove. We had two full cylinders in addition to the one we were using, but our tanks would not fit their stove connection. So I improvised a solution. I took one of our American connectors and one of John’s New Zealand fittings and connected a length of tubing between them using a pair of hose clamps. I carried our spare tank and the makeshift connection ashore and we hung it upside down from a tree and drained the liquefied gas into John’s bottle. After three hours of gravity transfer—problem solved. They were doing okay in the short term but I worried about how much of that was due to our assistance and to gifts from the now-departed yachts. What might happen to them after we left? Island people the world over are quite self sufficient, and there were plenty of fish in the lagoon, but still.

As the only remaining boat in Suwarrow we left the VHF on all night long since we knew there was little chance anybody would call and wake us, and if they did there would probably be a good reason. We were just starting to stir early one morning when John called.

“Caribee, this is John, can you switch to that channel? You know the one.” A few seconds passed while we rubbed sleep from our eyes and digested his request. “Caribee, this is John, do you copy?” More urgency.

I thought about what channel he meant and replied, “Switching.” It was really odd that John would feel the need to be stealthy with nobody else around but that seemed like what he was doing. I was anxious to hear what his reason might be.

“Randy, you there?”

“Morning John, what’s up?”

“Listen mate, there’s a ship aground in the outer channel. I think it could be... Well, I will tell you when you get here. Can you all come ashore right now?”

“Okay, sure, is there a problem?”

“I’m not sure but can you bring all your men and your weapons and just come on up?”

“Uh... yeah. We’ll all be right there.” Very strange, and a little scary. I figured it best not to say on the radio that we only had a machete and knives aboard, and a baseball bat. A couple of pole spears. A flare gun with expired flares that might or might not fire. And all my men? That would be Cheryl.

We jumped into Liz and headed straight in, our pulses a little elevated. John met us on the beach. He looked disappointed when he saw the machete I held. It looked just like the one in his hand.

“These are all of my weapons and men,” I said. He didn’t smile.

“I thought all Americans had a lot of guns.”

“Well, we don’t, sorry. Do you really think we might need guns?”

“I don’t know. I think it’s bloody odd. A professional captain and crew would know how to enter the lagoon, and why would a ship so big come inside here anyway? They have no business in here. Maybe they’re illegally fishing. Maybe the ship is stolen. Maybe... I don’t know. Maybe they have drugs.”

“I don’t know either but I doubt if they’re dangerous, not in this part of the world.” I said. “Do you really think they might be?”

“I don’t know.”

“Well, if they are we’re in trouble, just the two of us with knives and sticks, along with the women and boys.”

“I guess we could hide in the bush.”

“Let’s go across and get a look at them before we get too carried away.”

We went up to the ranger station. Cheryl, Veronica and the boys waited there while John and I walked the path to the windward side of Anchorage Island, to a spot behind the beach from where we had a clear view of the stranded vessel. Cheryl had wisely suggested that I bring our binoculars ashore. Using them, I could plainly see from the angle of the ship that she was hard aground at the bow. And it really was a ship, a small one maybe, but big enough to be properly called a ship, I’d say. I could also see that there were quite a few crewmembers scuttling about on deck, looking over the side and busy with some sort of action in progress.

“What do you think,” John said.

“She’s aground alright. Other than that, I don’t know. She’s big, maybe too big for a yacht, and there are a lot of crewmembers. I don’t see a flag. Almost looks like some class of fishing vessel but there’s no fishing gear showing.”

“Stay in the bush, don’t get out where they can see you,” he said. “Maybe they won’t know anybody’s here.”

“If they come around the island they’ll know. Our boat is lying at anchor, wide open. All your clothes and food and things are at the house. Of course they’ll be able to tell people are living here. And you called us on channel sixteen so they must have heard it. I think they could see Caribee from the pass, too.”

“Right. We can’t really hide, can we? Let me see your field glasses.”

Just then we saw a big rigid-bottomed inflatable launch being lowered from the ship with a boom crane. I took the binoculars from John and looked. There were two dark-skinned men already in the boat. In short order more were loaded aboard, maybe half a dozen in all. I watched them take the launch up to the bow of the ship, seemingly surveying the situation, trying to figure out how best to free it. The launch suddenly pulled away and came briskly up on plane, heading at high speed straight for the south end of the island. Our island.

“Let’s go,” I said, starting back. “They’re going around the south end. They’ll be pulling up on the beach over there in a minute if that’s where they’re headed. I don’t think we want them to beat us to the station.”

John was clearly agitated as we trotted back down the path. He was making me nervous too, and I started imagining all kinds of unpleasant scenarios involving armed men storming ashore with who knew what intent. Logically, it didn’t really make any sense, but it’s easy to let your imagination run wild when you don’t know what you’re facing. We got to the beach just in time to let our breathing slow a bit before the big inflatable hove into view and slowed down off plane to cross the shallow reef in front of the beach. John and I both held our machetes loosely, letting them hang close alongside our right legs, hopefully non-threatening but ready if needed.

As the inflatable launch drew near I could see that there was a stocky, middle-aged white man standing in the center of the boat dressed in a tropical shirt and cotton shorts. He didn’t look very menacing. The bow bumped onto the beach and two of the four Asian crewmembers helped him out and onto the damp sand. Watching him make his way up the incline toward us with two of the crewmen following deferentially behind I suddenly felt a little stupid standing there with a machete in my hand.

“G’day,” he said on approach, nodding his head forward. “Fred Molson, owner of the Sensar over there. We had a spot of trouble. My capt’n put ‘er on the ground. Just wanted to come and introduce myself.”

I caught his quick glance at the machetes we were pretending not to hold. We introduced ourselves, awkwardly switching our goofy weapons to our left hands in order to shake. John told him he was the ranger and invited him to come up to the station to check in and have a cup of tea.

“Well, I didn’t bring my documents with me, just wanted to make sure you were in residence. The information I had said the park might not be attended after the middle of October.”

“I shouldn’t really be here but the government is not able to pick us up right now, so looks like we will be here for a while.”

“How ‘bout we do the paperwork tonight aboard Sensar,” Fred said. “That’s the other reason I came over. Today is my birthday and I wanted to invite anybody who might be here to a party. You both, and all your families if you have ‘em, are welcome. Whoever’s on the island is invited. I hope you’ll come. Should be heaps of fun. We’ll have plenty of good food and drink.”

I could virtually see the gears of John’s mind spinning at the mention of food. We readily agreed and Fred said he would have us all picked up in the big runabout at five.

“What about the grounding, will you have to be towed off?” John asked.

“Nah, should be a’right. The capt’n says if we fill the swimming pool on the stern with seawater the bow will come up enough to back ‘er off when the tide comes in.”

Swimming pool? I had to see this vessel. Fred and his crew took off back around the island and we went up to the ranger residence to relay to Cheryl, Veronica and the boys the good news that we weren’t about to be slaughtered after all and instead were invited to a party and dinner on a large power yacht.

Fred was true to his word and had us plucked off the beach at five. He stood at the top of the gangway and welcomed us aboard the now free-floating Sensar. He gave us the grand tour, from the engine room to the staterooms and bridgedeck. She had clearly been a commercial vessel in an earlier life, not purpose built as a pleasure craft, but the modification was well executed and the yacht was luxurious in a robust, capable sort of way. No gin palace, this, but a comfortable working yacht. Fred said she had been a Scandinavian fishing research vessel in her original incarnation, and like many such vessels she was also used on espionage assignments from time to time during the cold war years. He now called her an exploration yacht and said he was heading to Antarctica for a cruise of the continent during the approaching southern hemisphere summer. He led us around the ship, introducing us to crewmembers as we happened upon them. He said that his full complement of captain, cook and crew numbered eighteen. He also had his Asian girlfriend (or maybe she was his wife) aboard, along with two longtime friends and their wives. We ended the tour on a sprawling afterdeck set with elegant dining tables. Fred directed a waiter to take our drink orders. Soft music tinkled in the background. We leaned against the stern railing of the elevated fantail and sipped as a final brilliant blaze of orange slipped grudgingly into the blue lagoon.

The posh setting was incongruous in such an inaccessible place. John, Veronica and the boys, especially the boys, appeared dumbstruck. After months of living with the rustic amenities of the ranger station the Sensar must have seemed like it hailed from another world. They watched spellbound as two cooks fired up commercial style gas grills off to one end of the tables. Before long the smoky aroma of sizzling steaks, pork chops, chicken and seafood drifted on the breeze. And yes, in true Aussie style, the cooks threw some shrimps on the barbie.

Fred was clearly having a blast as the center of attention. He pressed his excellent wines on us and no glass was allowed to remain unfilled for long. The food was varied and delicious and after the meal we all got a slice of birthday cake with real ice cream on top. From his friends we gleaned snippets of his backstory. He was a self-made man they said, apparently having started at the bottom and become some kind of industrial mogul, parleying a successful business into more businesses and finally into an empire. Something like that, though at about that point my memory of the night’s events starts to get a little fuzzy. I do vividly remember John lurching up with a wide grin and saying, “We are going to Raratonga in the morning on this ship. You have to close up the island for us because my friend Fred wants to leave first thing.”

“What? You’re leaving in the morning?”

“Yeah, mate, on this ship. Can you believe it? Freddie is taking us home in style, but he’s in a hurry. Will you help us?”

I told him we would, of course, but since it was getting late maybe we should see if we could get a ride back home now, catch a little sleep. John said that made a lot of sense. Fred agreed to have us dropped off at the island straight away. The inflatable was brought up and we all boarded, a little unsteadily, but at least nobody fell in the lagoon. One of Fred’s friends piloted the launch this time, navigating in pitch dark by following the chart-plotter track that had been laid down earlier when they picked us up. Unfortunately, he failed to allow for the lag time of the GPS input when traveling at high speed and started his turn into the beach a little late, smacking hard into the reef. Somehow he managed to back off without holing the boat or completely mangling the outboard’s props. We eventually made it to the beach and from there back home to Caribee.

The next morning was chaotic, not helped by the fact that all the adults were more than slightly hung over. John’s family frantically packed everything they wanted to carry home, trying not to forget anything important, while also trying to remember what needed to be done in order to close up the station properly. Mostly, John concentrated on what to take and just told us what we needed to do in order to leave the station battened down securely for the cyclone season. He also called me aside to tell me we could have free run of the atoll after he left.

“Listen mate, you’re going to have this whole place to yourselves now. You should take full advantage of it. It’s something very few people will ever have the chance to experience. I think you should go to the outer islands and get a look at the seabirds. I trust you. I know you won’t molest them, so go have a look. Take a lot of pictures. Just the two of you won’t hurt anything and you may never have a chance to see something like this again. This is a special place, there’s nowhere else like it. It’s vanishing, too. I’m afraid the birds may all be gone in a few years. I hope not, but things are changing. I know you know what I mean. The climate is changing, is what I think.”

“Thanks a lot John, we really appreciate that. We’ll make sure to be really careful and not to bother anything.”

“No worries. Say, you wouldn’t have any more of those ibuprofen tabs on you, would you?”

At nine they motored away from the beach with their belongings piled high, John still shouting just-remembered instructions to us as they went out of earshot.

“Well, it’s just you and me in paradise, babe,” I said.

“I know, isn’t it great? I’ve been thinking about it all morning. I can’t wait to see the bird islands. We’ll explore them all.”

“Let’s walk over to the windward side and watch Sensar go out the pass. When they weigh anchor we’ll be all alone in our world, just like Adam and Eve.”

“After that let’s go home and take a nap.”





The next morning we took off on the first of what would come to be our semi-daily dinghy sailing forays to the motus ringing the lagoon. We visited the nesting places of the frigates and the sooty terns, the red-footed, brown and masked boobies, the noddies, fairy terns, red tailed tropic birds and curlews. The diversity and sheer numbers of birds in such a compact area was astounding, like nothing we had seen or ever expected to see. Suwarrow is one of the premier seabird rookeries of the world. We knew we were privileged to be this intimate with such a special place, one of the last of its kind on earth, unfortunately. Many unrelated species nest side by side on the motus, their eggs and chicks scattered randomly about on the sandy soil. The birds have no natural enemies here so nesting on the ground is not hazardous and they registered no alarm at our approach, though we were careful not to invade their space. On the north end of Turtle Island sooty terns filled the air in numbers so vast that their shadows created an undulating, stroboscopic quilt of flashes on the ground and their raucous calls drowned out the crashing surf. The effect was psychedelic.





We alternated exploration days with workdays—days spent doing laundry at the pretty island cistern, making minor boat repairs in preparation for putting to sea, fishing (fighting sharks for fish), and gathering coconuts and breadfruit. Fish, coconut and breadfruit were now making up an increasing proportion of our diet. The more our stores dwindled the more we lived off the land and sea. The weather was uniformly perfect, in fact almost too good to be true. We were comfortable behind Anchorage Island but dangerously exposed to any sudden westerly wind and growing more nervous by the day about the impending change of seasons. A trick-or-treater-free Halloween night came and went and the next morning was officially the first day of cyclone season.

“I don’t feel good about being here anymore,” Cheryl said. “If we get a wind shift this anchorage will be untenable and I don’t even want to think about a cyclone developing while we’re here.”

“I agree. We need to go ahead and do whatever we’re going to do here and move along, the sooner the better. Our weather has been great but all luck runs out if you push it far enough.”

So we made a few more forays to the outer motus and started wrapping up our affairs. Once more circumstances dictated that we leave behind a place we had come to love. This was expected of course, but we were really going to miss our special private islands. We made a final trip ashore on the fifth of November to burn our trash and take one last look around to make sure we were leaving everything at the ranger station secure and according to John’s wishes. The next morning we hoisted the dinghy on deck, pulled the hook and sailed out the pass, leaving the seabirds at peace on the lonely windswept sand.





Kanton





I'm often asked, of all the places we have been, which has been our favorite. I never really know what to say because there have been so many good ones, along with some that were not so good, of course. But even the dumps usually had something good to offer. I can honestly say that we’ve never stopped anywhere that didn’t have at least one thing we liked about it. I guess that stands to reason since, unless we had to, we probably wouldn’t have stopped in the first place unless we thought a spot had something positive going for it. But some places are truly special, magical even. We’ve both always had an attraction to the wild places—to remoteness, isolation, what some would call desolation, especially when it’s combined with a diverse and thriving natural environment. Splendid isolation is just not some people’s thing but it is definitely one of ours. We found one such place right where you would expect to, smack in the middle of nowhere. It was, and is, one of a dwindling number of hideaways where it’s still possible to divorce yourself entirely from the tribulations of the outside world. A place where you can immerse yourself in nature, poke through the crumbling relics of a rich history and still have the chance to make new, genuine friends.

Kanton Atoll lies just south of the equator in the central Pacific, part of the Phoenix Group, perhaps best known as the area where Amelia Earhart was lost in 1937. It belongs to the far-flung island nation of Kiribati (pronounced KEAR-ah-bahs) and is the only atoll in its group with a proper anchorage. It’s also the only one that’s inhabited, and just barely so at that. The government of Kiribati stations a few residents on the atoll to maintain a presence in this distant corner of its domain; otherwise it would be just one more desert island on this huge span of ocean.

We charged through Kanton’s only pass and into its lagoon just before slack water one morning in early February at the end of a seven-hundred-mile passage from Pago Pago, American Samoa. Motor-sailing at full throttle we battled the remnants of an ebbing tide that was draining the lagoon. The flow would soon stop for a few short minutes, then reverse and start rushing back in through the same constricted passageway. The torrent had slowed dramatically during the past half-hour as we stood offshore and watched, but we were tired of waiting and ready to get inside and get the hook down. Besides, we might misjudge the time of slack water and we figured we would have more control in the narrow pass if we were working against the current instead of being swept along in its grasp. Better safe than sorry. If we hit a reef out here we would be on our own.

Caribee had never been so overloaded, not even when we departed Panama for our Pacific crossing. Not only were we lugging everything we would need (hopefully) to wait out the remaining three months of the South Pacific cyclone season, we also carried a heavy payload of goods and provisions for the islanders. We’d been in SSB contact with Riino, the island’s radio operator, for weeks and had done our best to fill their wish list. Our boat was too small to carry everything they’d asked for but we’d managed to put a good dent in the list.

The islanders awaited our arrival like children waiting for Santa, but we hoped they could wait just a little while longer. Once we were through the cut and the anchor was down the adrenalin rush quickly subsided and we felt the weight of a week’s accumulated fatigue. We couldn’t face hours of unloading, carrying ashore and distributing dinghy-loads of wares until we’d had a chance to sleep. I radioed Herwig, the captain of the forty-seven-foot Austrian-flagged yacht Monja (the only other vessel in the anchorage) to see if he would ask the people to please wait until tomorrow to take delivery of their goods.

The next morning we could see a few folks standing on the beach and looking out at us. We launched Liz and took our documents ashore for the entry formalities. A compact man dressed casually in a T-shirt and shorts stepped forward as we climbed out of the dinghy.

“Mauri. Welcome to Kanton. I am Frank, Officer in Charge.”

“Thank you, it’s really good to be here. I’m Randy. This is Cheryl.”

“Of course, we know who you are. We have been expecting you,” he said, grinning.

“I know you have. We have packages on the boat with your name on them.”

He laughed. “Well, since I am the immigration officer, and the customs officer, why don’t we get out of the sun and do your paperwork.”

We sat under the fronds of a palm tree on a wooden plank supported by two rusty, five-gallon buckets and filled out some short forms. Our official entry would be complete after we paid a fee of twenty Australian dollars. Kiribati does not issue its own currency.

“We don’t have any Australian, will it be okay to pay you after the people pay us for the things we brought?” I asked.

“Of course. You will have plenty of money soon.”

The other islanders soon began arriving from their settlement. They came on foot, on bicycles and on small motorbikes. They introduced themselves as they happily dug through the bags and boxes that we carried ashore, distributing items to their proper owners. We tried out their strange-sounding names on our tongues, which sometimes provoked rounds of laughter. They sorted out the goods and paid us cash on the barrelhead for everything, well over a thousand Australian dollars at the going exchange rate. The twenty-dollar fee we paid to the government would be virtually all that we would spend for the next three months, leaving us with a wad of Australian currency to exchange when we returned to the land of banking and commerce.

“Good,” Frank said. “Now, when do you want to have your welcome ceremony? Tonight?”

I looked at Cheryl. She shrugged. “Welcome ceremony?” I said.

Frank looked perplexed. “Of course. You are our guests. We must welcome you.” He made it sound like only an idiot would ask such a question. “Well, tomorrow then. We will have a feast in the maneaba tomorrow evening at five, at the settlement. Is that okay?”

“Sure, thank you,” I said. “Do we wear anything special, or bring anything?”

“I will explain it to you,” Herwig said. He and his wife Monika had come ashore to watch the unpacking of the goods and to meet us and visit with their island friends.

“We can come with scooters and pick you up,” said Paeniu, the atoll’s Catholic catechist.

“We walk it all the time,” said Herwig. “It’s about two miles and the road is asphalt. Is that too far?”

“No, but why can’t we just take the dinghy?” I asked.

“There are many coral heads. Some reach well above the surface at low tide. It’s a minefield of coral, and even if you find a route through it, you could never make it back at night.”

“It sounds like good exercise anyway,” Cheryl said. “Let’s just walk.”

I agreed and it was settled. We would attend our welcome feast tomorrow evening at five. The entire population, all thirty-five men, women and children, would be there to welcome us to their island.

Herwig and Monika invited us to have sundowner cocktails in Monja’s cockpit that evening. They had been in Kanton for nearly three months now and were anxious to share what they’d learned.

“They are wonderful people, and we have become close friends with many of them,” Herwig said. “They have very little but love to share what they have with you. But there is something strange you should know. They are divided between Protestants and Catholics, and even this small population has friction. After they feel comfortable around you, you may find that each side has some bad things to say about the other ones. But still, they will help each other when needed. Loan things to each other and so forth. Mostly, they get along, but there is an undercurrent.”

As Herwig talked in his German-accented English it became clear that he and Monika viewed the Catholics in a more favorable light. He seemed to bear some resentment against Frank, in particular. “Nobody here would ever directly ask you for anything, except Frank,” he said. “It is an embarrassment to the others, even the other Protestants.”

We’d only just met Frank, but thus far he seemed nice enough. I wasn’t sure how much of this was just a personality conflict and decided to form my own opinion. We didn’t yet know who belonged to which church but all the people had seemed very friendly to us.

We hiked to the settlement the next afternoon with Herwig and Monika. We passed decaying concrete bunkers and rusting military gear as we walked along the flat, potholed road. The vegetation was low and scrubby, a consequence of the arid climate and the poor, sandy soil. Bushes crowded the edges of the asphalt, narrowing the road to a single lane in places. I carried the chocolate cake Cheryl had made as a contribution to the feast. Monika had told us that while the islanders loved sweets, they didn’t really have anything sweet of their own except the raw sugar that they used in their hot tea.

The settlement consisted mainly of small, single-level wooden houses in varying degrees of decay. They had been built between the 1950s and the 1970s to house American aircraft and space program support personnel. A lush stand of coconut palms shielded the homes from the rays of the equatorial sun, making it one of the coolest spots on the atoll. The maneaba, or meetinghouse, was a newer structure built by the government of Kiribati. It was a large, open-sided affair, covered by a pitched metal roof that was supported by painted wooden poles.

There were a few people already inside when we arrived, sitting cross-legged on woven mats spread on the concrete floor. We removed our shoes and added them to the row of flip-flops by the entrance. We’d worn our “closed-toes” because we thought that two miles each way was a little too far to walk in flip-flops, even on a paved road. Paeniu indicated that we should sit on a mat near the center of the room, the place of honor. We sat and made small talk with those already there while waiting for the others to arrive. Everyone spoke English to us, the official language of Kiribati, but among themselves they sometimes spoke Gilbertese.

“We want to thank you again for bringing our things from Samoa,” Riino said. “Your boat is small and we know it was a difficulty for you, but it helped us very much. The supply ship has not come in more than three months. Some of the people have been eating only fish. The rice and milk powder and flour that you carried are very important. Also the tea and kava.”

“We’re very happy that we could help,” Cheryl said. I agreed.

“Thank you very much for finding a good price on my ukulele,” Paeniu said. “In Tarawa it would have cost a lot more. Very much more, and my family would have had to put it on the ship. Maybe the ship will never come?”

“The ship will have to come, won’t it?” I asked. “How else will you get supplies?”

“Sooner or later it will, but it has sometimes been half a year between ships. How do they expect us to wait so long for food?” he said, shaking his head in dismay. “They say that both ships now have engines that are not working. It could still be months.”

We’d heard through the grapevine about Kanton’s chronic re-supply problem, which was one reason we had contacted Riino by radio. The neglect of the islanders is a result of both geography and the relative unimportance of the island to the government. Its isolation is daunting. The Republic of Kirabati is scattered across an expanse of ocean that includes all four of the world’s hemispheres and covers an area the size of the continental United States, but its thirty-three low-lying atolls have a combined landmass of only three hundred square miles, less than a quarter of Rhode Island’s acreage. Kanton lies about midway between the population centers of Tarawa, to the west, and Christmas Island, to the east, and is nearly a thousand miles from each. The closest inhabited foreign islands are Samoa and Tuvalu, both more than seven hundred miles distant. While there is an eight-thousand-foot abandoned runway in nearly pristine condition left over from the days of the American space program—a runway fully capable of handling large jets, at least in daylight hours—no aircraft of any kind had landed for many years. Kanton is about as far off the beaten path as it’s possible to get.

Once the rest of the islanders had filtered in, the head of each household rose to introduce his family and make a short speech. All of the family chiefs had government jobs, and everyone else on the island was a member of one of the families, either nuclear or extended. Frank was the official face of government, Riino was the radio operator and postmaster (though no mail had yet been posted in the nine years of his term), Kaiea was the Protestant minister, Paenui was the catechist and a schoolteacher, Owen’s wife Biteta was another schoolteacher, and Naniseni was the medical practitioner.





Next, it was my turn to formally introduce Cheryl and myself to them, and make a short speech of my own. Afterwards, the entire community stood before us and sang several native songs, a cappella style, accompanied by body percussion. They had beautiful, soaring voices, and though the lyrics were in Gilbertese we thoroughly enjoyed the performance.

After the singing was concluded Frank announced that it was time to eat.

“In Kiribati, the men eat first and the women and children eat what is left after we have finished,” he said. “But since Randy and Cheryl are our guests of honor, Cheryl may eat with the men. Also Monika, since she is European as well and also a guest.”

Cheryl was uncomfortable with this and at first said she would wait and eat with the women. After some quiet discussion with Monika she decided to follow tradition for the ceremony, but she vowed that if this was how it worked she would henceforth eat with the women at any future feasts. She was going to be a troublemaker.

The men, along with Cheryl and Monika, sat in a circle on a large woven mat in the center of the floor while the women set out dishes covered by cloths to protect the food from flies. They pulled away the cloths to display the food and asked us to please eat. The I-Kiribati, as the people of Kiribati call themselves, do not typically use western style furniture, nor do they use any sort of silverware or utensils for eating, but rather sit on a mat and scoop food onto their plates and eat with their fingers. We followed suit. We both felt a little uncomfortable eating while the women and children sat off to the side and watched, but the island men took no notice of them.

It was a bit of a stretch to call the meal a feast, but considering what the islanders had to work with, it was impressive. They have no electricity except what they produce at home with small solar arrays and gasoline generators, thus no refrigeration. While most have kerosene cook stoves, much of the cooking was done in outdoor ovens improvised from oil drums and fired by coconut husks. This gave the food a smoky flavor that we enjoyed. The meal consisted of various species of reef fish served with white rice, unleavened bread, charred breadfruit, and a couple of coconut dishes. Cheryl’s chocolate cake was the big hit of the evening. The men consumed it in its entirety before the women or children even got a taste, and seemed baffled by Cheryl’s suggestion that they might want to save a few slices for their wives and kids. Frank alone ate four slices.

Walking back to the anchorage, Cheryl complained about the lack of respect shown to the women. Monika told her that she had felt much the same at first, but had come to accept that it was the way of their culture, and in fact the women did not mind so much and had ways of evening the score. She said her method of handling the food situation was to make two dishes and keep the second one packed away until the men had finished eating and then bring it out for the women. She said that on normal occasions she ate with the women as well, but had made an exception for tonight’s ceremony.

As we walked and talked, Herwig told the story of a recent big event on the island. About three weeks before we arrived a Chinese fishing ship more than two hundred feet long had run directly into the atoll while illegally fishing in Kiribati waters. They hit the shoreline at a right angle, running hard aground on the reef where they stuck fast. Of course we knew from experience about the dubious piloting skills of some Chinese fishing boat navigators, so this wasn’t really a shock, and it’s not exactly like there have never been any shipwrecks on the atoll before. Much of Kanton’s history, like that of many low-lying atolls and reefs that are spread across the Pacific, was written by ships that have come to grief on its shores.

“But how did they get off?” Cheryl asked.

“That is an interesting story,” Monika said. “Herwig can tell it better. He watched it all and took many photographs.”

Herwig explained that, as you would expect, everyone on the atoll was soon aware that there was a ship stuck on the reef. Riino radioed the capital on Tarawa for instructions, at which time the government determined that the ship was unlicensed to fish in Kiribati waters. Since it was impossible for them to dispatch a patrol boat for some of the usual reasons (no fuel, no working boat, no crew, too far away), they directed the police force of Kanton, that is to say Frank, to arrest and detain the offending ship’s captain.

The islanders only had one boat among them, a twelve-foot fishing skiff powered by a ten-horsepower outboard that belonged to Naniseni. This was the same boat for which we had just delivered a gallon of epoxy resin and a bolt of fiberglass cloth so that Naniseni could fix the holes in its bottom. Frank, Naniseni and a small delegation of island men motored out the pass in the skiff, bailing as they went, and headed for the stranded ship, with Frank in full uniform (but unarmed) and holding a flagpole with a large Kiribati flag flapping in the breeze. The posse arrived on the scene and demanded that the captain surrender to arrest. He declined, displaying a crew of a dozen men at the ship’s rail, some of them armed. Frank made an executive decision. He went home. The ship sat on the reef for several days while radio messages flew between Kanton and Tarawa. Eventually a second Chinese vessel of identical design arrived on the scene. A very heavy hawser was run between the two, the grounded ship was pulled free on the high tide and nothing more was seen nor heard of the most recent in a long line of vessels to strike Kanton.





The first ship known to have hit the atoll was the one that gave it its name, the whaling ship Canton, which slammed into the reef in 1854. The ship was lost, but the crew escaped to the Marianas after one of the most heroic and epic voyages in maritime history, as well as one of the most obscure. The battered survivors reached Tinian Island after forty-nine days at sea in an open boat without the loss of a single man. The feat eclipsed Captain William Bligh’s famous open boat voyage, made sixty-five years earlier, by two days, yet few have ever heard of it.

The British laid claim to the atoll shortly after the Canton smashed into it, in the typical fashion of the time: They stopped, planted a flag and sailed away. It was then ignored for some eighty years until, in an egregious affront to British sovereignty, the Americans claimed it in 1937. Suddenly, Canton was important, and was immediately reoccupied by the Brits. Gunboats were dispatched by both powers. The confrontation escalated to the point that shots were exchanged over bows before a cease-fire was declared to await instructions from respective governments. War was averted when an agreement was reached providing for joint administration for the next fifty years. The islanders still refer to the land south of the pass as the British side and call that north of the pass the American side.

The main drivers of the atoll’s history then switched from the nautical to the aeronautical. Less than two years after Ms. Earhart went missing somewhere in the region, Pan American World Airways arrived on Canton to build facilities for their planned New Zealand flying boat service. They developed the lagoon as a stopover and refueling station for the new Boeing 314 Pacific Clipper “flying boat” airliner. The service began on July 12, 1940, but was destined to be short-lived. On December 4, 1941, the last civilian Clipper departed the lagoon bound for New Caledonia. Three days later Japanese warplanes rained bombs onto the American fleet in Pearl Harbor, marking a shift of power in the Pacific and the end of the flying boat service. The pilings that marked the aquatic runways still stand, crisscrossing the western end of the lagoon in perfectly straight lines. On the British side, the remains of the old Clipper beaching ramps can be seen stretching along the shore.

The war may have halted passenger service, but not aviation. The U.S. Navy built a six-thousand-foot runway that became a critical stopover for air transport flights to Australia and New Zealand, as well as a staging point for later attacks on the Japanese-held Gilbert Islands. This runway was later extended to its present-day length. There were twelve hundred combat troops stationed on Canton to defend the airstrip, but the Japanese never attacked it. Japanese submarines did shell the troop transport ship USS President Taylor, three times. Its sunken, partially awash hull still blocks the south edge of the pass.

After the war Canton once again became a link in the trans-Pacific passenger service of Pan Am, this time servicing the new Douglas DC-4 land-based aircraft. Quantas and Canadian Pacific Airlines later used the runway as a refueling stop for the DC-7C, and a full-scale community was established to support the operation. By the end of the 1950s, long-range jet aircraft spelled the end of Canton’s usefulness as a refueling station. The last Pan-Am flight departed the runway in 1965.

Just as the airlines were abandoning the atoll a new variety of flight was making an impact. The space age had arrived and a tracking station was built in the early 1960s to service America’s ambitious Mercury manned space program. The United States continued to use Canton as a missile-tracking station through 1976, when the airfield was abandoned and all U.S. personnel were removed. The atoll was transferred to Kiribati sovereignty in 1979, and Canton Island officially became Kanton Atoll.

Cheryl and I spent many lazy days poking through the detritus of flying boats, warplanes, airliners and early-space-age tracking equipment, playing guessing games about which era each piece belonged to and what its purpose might have been. Trade winds whistled through holes in the roof and creaked the rusty metal door hinges of an otherwise silent and empty aircraft hangar near the end of the long asphalt airstrip. Drifts of faded airline ticket carbons piled up rustling in the breeze in a corner of the hollow Pan-Am terminal.

Wherever we went we found fascinating artifacts, often in the most unlikely of places. We set a goal of seeing the entire rim of the atoll before leaving, believing that we would probably never return. It’s possible, in theory, to walk all the way around the perimeter, starting at one side of the pass and arriving at the other. We considered making the hike, walking during daylight hours and camping at night. We figured we could get Nanesini to carry us across the pass in his launch when we reached the end, to where we would have left Liz. A few experimental forays along the rim showed us that it would be a challenging trek and impossible to do with just a single night spent camping. That meant that we’d have to carry at least three day’s worth of food, and more critically, water. During the war a jeep track had spanned the atoll’s twenty-three-mile circumference but the scrubby brush had long since reclaimed it. In some places remnants of the rough road could be seen, but for much of the way walking meant either wading in the surf or pushing your way through thick, rough bushes. Either way would be slow going.

Instead, we settled for taking in the rim in small bites. We rigged Liz for sailing and on sunny, light-wind days we would beat into the easterlies in the morning, explore a stretch of land during the middle of the day and make the downwind run back to Caribee in the afternoon. In this way we managed to see the entire atoll in about three weeks. It was seven miles to the eastern end of the lagoon, so having a sailing dinghy was crucial to our ability to survey it all. Not only was sailing more relaxing and quieter than motoring, it saved precious gasoline, which we could replenish only from the islanders’ minimal and dwindling stocks. We vowed not to run through our own stores of gas before the end of our stay, no matter what.

“Nice, huh?” I said. We were ghosting along, close-hauled in a whisper of a breeze, our legs hanging over Liz’s gunwale, bare feet dragging through the cool water. I was steering with one finger on the tiller. The only sounds were a slight creaking of the mast against its step and the gentle thump of tiny wavelets slapping the hull, like fingers softly tapping the body of an acoustic guitar.

“It’s so peaceful and quiet,” Cheryl said. “Nothing runs away from us. You forget how much the outboard scares the animals.”

“I thought you were going to touch that big turtle with your foot before it dived.”

“It must have been asleep. He went down fast once he saw us.”

It wasn’t the first time we’d sailed silently up to a green sea turtle, or to birds feeding along the shoreline. The weather was perfect almost every day, not really what we had expected so close to the equator. The wind was generally light but it cooled things down nicely because, with a maximum land elevation of twenty feet at the top of the highest “hill”, we got its full effect. Widely scattered popcorn clouds drifted across a clear blue sky day after day. Equatorial squalls seldom put in an appearance and they were mostly dry when they did. Rainfall was sparse indeed. I doubt if we got an inch in the entire time we were at Kanton. That was fine with us because we had a high-capacity reverse osmosis watermaker, but for the islanders it was a real problem.

There is no groundwater on Kanton save that from a hand-dug well that produces brackish water useful only for washing dishes and clothes. All drinking and cooking water has to be gathered from rainfall, which is a tough proposition in a place where it seldom rains. Still, they’ve managed to make do with this method for years, by practicing extreme conservation. Every available container, mostly fifty-five-gallon drums that have been scavenged over the years, is used to catch the rainwater that’s shunted off of roofs by a hodgepodge of pipes and hoses. It’s not the best tasting water but it’s drinkable.

I watched from the cockpit one afternoon as Paeniu pulled up to the beach behind our anchorage on his motor scooter. He just stood there and looked out at Caribee. He never waved his arms or called out, but I knew he wanted something so I went ashore. He’d ridden out to invite us to a kava ceremony the next evening, a party they were planning to have at some old picnic tables under the palms that grew between a collection of abandoned corrugated buildings and huts at the end of the old wharf near our anchorage. We had brought several kilos of powdered kava root to the islanders and they were anxious to throw a kava party. Herwig and Monika had told us they would use any pretext to justify a party, and with such limited entertainment prospects, who could blame them? Neither of us had yet tried kava but we knew it was widely used as a mild recreational intoxicant in the South Pacific islands.

“It would make us very happy if you would come,” Paeniu said. “We will play music and sing and dance for you. Do you play any instruments?”

“Well, I used to play keyboards, but that was a long time ago,” I said, “and I don’t have a keyboard anyway.”

“If you want to play, maybe we could borrow the Protestants’ keyboard. The one they use in church.”

“No, I don’t play anymore. So the Protestants will be coming too?”

“Well, not really,” Paeniu said, looking a little bashful. “It will be all Catholics this time.”

“We’ll be happy to come either way, thank you. What time?”

“Come to shore when you see us arrive. It will be about an hour before sundown.”

“Should we bring anything?”

“Not really.” Paeniu suddenly found his flip-flops very interesting.

“Are you sure?”

“Well, would it be possible, I mean only if it is no bother, for you to bring twenty liters of water?” He was still looking at his feet. “For making the kava.”

“No problem. We’ll bring twenty liters of the best water you’ve ever tasted.”

He looked up, smiling broadly. “Ko rab’a, thank you so much, our water is not good enough for guests. We drink it but I don’t want to serve it to you.”

I told him we were looking forward to tomorrow night and thanked him for the invitation. I really didn’t mind bringing the water. It would only take an extra fifteen minutes of run time to produce, but I did hope that it wouldn’t become a regular request. Our diesel reserves were tight. We would soon have a problem if we tried to meet their needs as well as our own.

We dinghyed a plastic five-gallon jerry jug full of water ashore when people started arriving, just before dark. Paneniu’s nephew, a young man named Kaweba, poured about two gallons into a pink plastic tub that sat on one of the tables while Paeniu explained the mixing procedure.

“We take a measure of kava powder, about like this,” he said, scooping a double handful out of a plastic bag. “Then we put it into a piece of pantyhose material. Kaweba, hold the end open so I can pour it in. Then we tie the cloth into a knot, like this.” He dumped the powder onto a section of knotted pantyhose while Kaweba held it open, then tied a knot in the other end. “Then we put it into the water and let it soak for a while, like a tea bag.”

“Is that the traditional pantyhose technique the old people used?” Cheryl asked.

“Well,” Paeniu laughed, “the people of old times used a square of fine woven cotton, but we learned that pantyhose works better. Someday, pantyhose will be the traditional way.”





Once it was soaked through, he squeezed it a few times, straining the kava. He then soaked it a few minutes longer before slowly squeezing it again and pronouncing it ready. He took a bowl made from half of a coconut shell and stirred the vat several times, scooping up the fines off the bottom and mixing them in with the liquid. He then filled the bowl and drank it down in one gulp.

“Good. It tastes good. Not really strong like Tongan or Fijian kava, but good.” He asked if I wanted to try it. I told him yes, though I wasn’t really sure I did. It looked like muddy water. He held his thumb and forefinger about two inches apart and asked, “High tide?” Then he closed them until they were only an inch apart and asked, “Or, low tide?”

“Low tide,” I said. “To start with.”

“Drink it all down at one time,” he said. “Don’t try to sip it. Most palangi try to sip it the first time.”

I took the coconut bowl, put it to my lips and turned it up, gulping down the musty-smelling liquid. It wasn’t hard to see why you wouldn’t want to sip it. It tasted like dirt, with a peppery aftertaste. I concentrated on smiling.

“How do you like it?” Nanesini asked, a mischievous grin playing at the corners of his mouth.

“It’s good,” I said, which set him to cackling and slapping his knees.

Next, Cheryl gulped down a low tide bowl. I watched her reaction, but she did well. All I detected was a squinting of her eyes before she smiled and said, “I like it.” Nanesini erupted in a belly laugh. I don’t think we were fooling him.

The sun dropped into the sea, the men lit kerosene lamps and the women laid out the feast they’d prepared for the party. It looked delicious but Paeniu cautioned us that it was not good to eat much before drinking kava, though he couldn’t really explain why when I asked. We noticed that neither he nor the other men ate. We couldn’t resist a few small portions, especially of the lobster and fish. We forced ourselves to stop eating before we were really full because it was clear that they thought it would not be a good idea to drink kava on a full stomach.

They set the kava bowl up on the sturdiest table and started to play and sing. Paeniu played his new ukulele and Kaweba played a guitar. They played and sang traditional island songs in Gilbertese interspersed with American country and western songs in English. They read the lyrics from tattered songbooks they’d collected over the years. It was funny to hear the familiar old country songs done in Pacific island style. After each song, they took a kava break, passing the bowl around. All the men drank but none of the island women did. I drank every round, even moving up to high tides, but Cheryl, Herwig and Monika skipped many rounds. I guess it’s an acquired taste because I was beginning to think it really wasn’t that bad.

I concentrated on what I was feeling, trying to see if the kava was having any effect on me. All the men seemed to be in an extra festive mood, but I didn’t feel anything at all. The only thing I noticed was that it made me have to pee a lot. I mean a whole lot, and it seemed to be having the same effect on everybody. Every other kava break was followed by a quick trip to the bushes by half the drinkers. I sat and drank and listened to the music and drank and went to the bushes. Time passed soft and easy. A canopy of brilliant stars winked down on our little glow of warm lantern light.





Paeniu paused at the end of a song, put his ukulele down and announced that the children would now put on a special performance for us. All the island kids—or rather all the Catholic ones, representing the age spectrum from five to sixteen—stepped into the light from a darkened hut doorway. They were dressed in colorful costumes of bright cloth adorned with freshly picked flowers. The men started to play a traditional Kiribati piece and the children sang along in sweet child voices. Then the girls performed a dance that emphasized hand and arm movements and quick, bird-like moves of the head—a very traditional Kiribati style. It was all really cute and well done, and it was obvious they’d spent long hours practicing. We all clapped and cheered. Their bright smiles reflected the pride they felt in their performances. Afterward, Paeniu asked everyone to get up and dance to a song, which turned into several songs and several dances, with everyone laughing and having a good time.

We never ceased to be amazed at how easily the islanders laughed and smiled. I’m not talking about just while drinking kava, but all the time. It was as if they were in a nearly perpetual state of happiness, which according to some surveys, they are. Kiribati, though consistently rated as one of the world’s poorest countries, is also consistently rated near the top of the “happiness index”. Westerners could learn a lot from these people.

The night wore on and the string players played and sang. A cool breeze wafted off the lagoon and more bowls of kava were mixed and drunk. I was convinced that it was having no effect on me. Still, I kept having the feeling that I was repeatedly waking from a daydream, that my thoughts had drifted the way they might if you were bored in a classroom and your mind was somewhere else. But I wasn’t bored; I was fully attentive. The night was interesting and entertaining, the soft music mixing pleasantly with the night breeze, a pleasurable evening indeed.

I slept late the next morning. When I woke up, Cheryl asked how I felt. I thought I felt just fine, but I did seem to be moving slowly. I told her that I didn’t understand what the big deal with kava was; it didn’t give me any noticeable high. But the more I thought about it, the more last night seemed like a dream. I could remember it all, or at least I thought I could remember most of it well enough, but there was a feeling of unreality and detachment about it, like I was remembering a movie I had seen rather than something I had actually done. Maybe I just hadn’t yet learned to process the effect, like first-time marijuana smokers who swear they’re not high as they giggle and stuff their mouths with munchies.

We returned from a hike late one morning to find Owen and David, two young men from the Protestant faction, waiting where we’d tied Liz to a rock on the beach. They’d ridden out from the settlement on Owen’s motorbike.

“You have been exploring again?” Owen asked.

“Yeah, we were looking at that old radar dish,” I said. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen one that big, it must be more than a hundred feet across.”

“There are rusty old things like that all around,” David said. “We use the pieces to make things.”

“You can use my motorbike any time you want to explore,” Owen said. “It’s a lot faster than walking.”

“Thank you very much, but we don’t have much gasoline, and we don’t want to use yours, you might not be able to replace it for a long time.”

Owen shrugged. They had set some plastic bags on the battered picnic table where the kava bowl had been set up a few nights ago. David started pulling out an assortment of objects made from tiny white seashells that had been strung together with thin monofilament fishing line like strands of beads—bowls, vases, candle holders and ashtrays. He held them out to us. They were more ornamental than useful, but beautifully made with exquisite attention to detail.





“You like these things?” David asked.

“They’re beautiful,” Cheryl said.

“They’re for you,” Owen said. “A gift. We have a lot of things like these.”

“Ko rab’a Owen,” Cheryl said, “but it’s too much, it must take days to make these.”

“This? No, just one hour to make this,” Owen said. “Biteta can make all of these in one day. All the women can do it.”

“That’s amazing. Thank you,” Cheryl said. “I feel like we should give you something in return, but we don’t have much.”

“Do you have any T-shirts from America?” David asked.

We had quite a few old T-shirts and other articles of clothing, but had never thought of them as something anybody would especially want. We agreed to meet them the next morning with some clothes for them to look at.

They arrived as promised and were quite excited by all the clothes we brought ashore, especially any T-shirts with a foreign or unusual logo. They offered to bring us more shell novelties if we had more clothes to trade, but we told them we had to save what we had left to wear.

“What about tools?” Owen asked. “We are building a new section on the church, do you have a saw?”

I did have a circular saw, but it was a 110-volt model and most of the generators and inverters on the atoll produced 240 volts. Owen and David assured me that Frank owned a generator that produced both 110 and 240 volts, so I said I would meet them at the Protestant church the next day with my saw, to see if it would work. I didn’t trust them not to accidentally connect the saw to a 240-volt outlet and fry the motor. I told them that if it worked and they knew how to use it, they could borrow it and use it until we left, but I didn’t want to trade it.

“Do you have anything besides these to trade?” I asked, holding up one of the shell bowls.

“Fish?”

“Well,” I said, “the fishing is so good here it’s easy for us to catch all we can eat.”

“What about lobster?” David asked.

“Now you’re talkin’.”

We’d tried our hand at lobster hunting, with less than spectacular results. Lobster hunting in the Pacific is a whole different ballgame than lobster hunting in the Caribbean. There, you just spend a lot of time snorkeling and looking under coral heads and into crevices until you find a lobster, then snare, grab or spear it, depending on how ecologically minded or skilled you are. Spearing is discouraged, if not outright illegal, because it’s impossible to tell if you have speared a female with eggs until after you’ve already killed her. Here, the looking-into-holes method generally doesn’t work very well for some reason. We learned that the islanders’ technique is to wait until a full moon and then wade on the reef flats during a nighttime low tide while carrying a spotlight and a big bucket or a cloth bag. The idea is to shine the light all around as you wade through the ankle-deep water of the wide flats, which are hard limestone and almost parking-lot-smooth. You find a lobster when the light hits its eyes, making them show up as reflective red dots. Then you step on the lobster with your foot to immobilize it, pick it up with your gloved hand and drop it into your bucket or bag. We had tried the technique on the last full moon, and after three hours spent trudging across the flooded flats, had gathered just one smallish lobster before the rising tide and hordes of squirming eels drove us to the beach. We would clearly starve to death if we had to depend on our lobster hunting skills to survive here.

The lobster trading arrangement began an informal exchange cycle in which we would do things for the islanders and they would, in turn, do things for us. They brought us lobster and more shell handicrafts, loaned us bicycles and motorbikes, and invited us to their feasts. We loaned them our saw, hand tools and DVD movies. We brought water to the kava parties, baked chocolate cakes and made hand-painted signs for the churches and the post office. I would also reset Riino’s tsunami warning station computer whenever it got out of kilter, which happened a lot since he had no computer skills at all.

A PTWC (Pacific Tsunami Warning Center) reporting station had been established on Kanton, and since nobody on the atoll was qualified to maintain and operate it, they enlisted Riino, the most qualified person available. I guess they figured that if he could operate a radio he could use a computer and monitor a complex system of electronic components. Not so much, as it turned out. Even though the station was meant to operate in automatic mode with very little operator oversight, every few days Riino would ask if I could please meet him at the station to fix the computer. He assumed that all palangi were computer experts, and with Herwig and Monika preparing to sail away, I became the atoll’s de facto technology authority. I found that the problems usually had a simple solution. Just ending and restarting an application or process that had failed to respond would often set things right. Riino was always impressed when it worked. There was also an issue of recurring messages warning of low voltage in the system. The station was equipped with a large bank of high-quality 12-volt batteries that were charged by a rooftop solar array. This battery bank supplied power to the satellite uplink system that fed data into the main computer at the warning center headquarters in ’Ewa Beach, Hawaii. The islanders used 12-volt batteries at home, too, but theirs were often old and would barely hold a charge. The solution was obvious. They would borrow the good batteries from the tsunami warning station, use them to run their portable DVD players and shortwave radio receivers until they ran them flat, then carry them back to the station for recharging. I think some cruiser had taught them the method in years past. I visualized some confused technician at the command center in Hawaii trying to figure out why they kept losing contact with the Kanton reporting station.

The islanders were expert at making use of whatever material was available, and all the cast-off military gear strewn about gave them plenty to work with. Anything that could conceivably be put to use was, and they could be very inventive. They were short on tools and building materials to make repairs or construct new buildings, so they took advantage of what was already in place. Many of the old houses had decayed to the point of being unusable, but there were more houses than families, so whenever a house deteriorated beyond redemption they simply gathered up their belongings and moved into a better one. This couldn’t continue indefinitely of course because the whole of the island’s infrastructure was in slow decline. Eventually, new living quarters would have to be built, but for the time being it was a good system. Every family also had what they referred to as a wharf house that they used as a vacation home of sorts. These were simple pole sheds covered by panels of rusting corrugated zinc roofing, but they had equipped them with sleeping mats and had set up cooking barrels outside on the ground. These had originally been storage sheds that occupied the north end of the wharf.





They were quite proud of their improvised schoolhouse near the settlement, too, and invited us to come have a look. We had to admit that it was a really good idea. They had taken a large, high-ceilinged, one-room metal building that had been some type of aircraft hangar or storage building in times past and partitioned the middle area of it into two small classrooms. You could walk all the way around the outside of the classroom structure while inside the large building. The plywood-walled rooms were dwarfed by the huge space they sat in—little open-top boxes sitting inside a big box. The children could look up and see the underside of the metal roof far above.

The weeks passed and our provisions slowly dwindled. We ran out of eggs seven weeks after leaving Pago Pago. This was not due to poor planning but because space in our small refrigerator was too valuable to devote to egg storage when we left Samoa. We later shifted some eggs into the cooler as space was freed up, which extended their shelf life. It’s well known to long distance sailors that fresh eggs that have never been cold stored will last for more than a month without refrigeration, even in tropical heat, if they are turned every day. The easiest way to turn eggs is to take the whole carton or plat and flip it upside down one day and right side up the next, alternating the orientation every day. This keeps the inside of the shells moist and non-porous, preventing oxidation from taking hold.

David and his wife, Neimee, heard us discussing our egg problem and were baffled. “Have you not been gathering eggs?” Neimee asked Cheryl.

“Gathering eggs? Are there chickens here?” This question brought a big laugh.

“No, not eggs from chickens, from the seabirds. We always collect them, they’re really good, better than any chicken eggs.” She explained the proper way to collect the eggs of the noddies that whirled in great clouds above Bird Island, the small cay just to the south of the pass. The birds lay their eggs on the rocky ground of the little island because it has no rats or other predators. The idea of taking seabird eggs was against our ecological instincts but Neimee insisted that it was common practice in Kiribati, and it caused the birds no harm. She told us the trick was to only take eggs that are newly laid and not ones that were about to hatch. That way, not only do you get an egg that’s good to eat but also leave the majority of them to hatch, so the population is not impacted.

“But how can you tell if they’re about to hatch?” Cheryl asked.

Neimee explained that you carry a bucket of seawater as you walk around the island looking for eggs, and when you find one, you drop it into the water to see if it sinks or floats. “If it floats, it is too far along, put it back on the ground and the bird will return to it. If it sinks it’s good to eat, but if it raises off the bottom on its end put it back because it is also too far along and won’t be good to eat. It must sink and lay on its side at the bottom of the bucket.” She told us that we might not find too many good eggs because the women had gathered eggs only three days ago and only the ones that had been laid since then would be good.

We gave it another few days before we tried our luck. We anchored Liz off the rocky beach in foot-deep water and waded ashore with our bucket of seawater. The sky was filled with squawking, whirling noddies. They circled and dived and landed and took flight again, constantly in motion as we scanned the rocky ground for eggs. There were plenty to be found, so many in fact that the problem wasn’t finding them but accidentally stepping on them. Sometimes a noddy would be sitting on one or two eggs and take flight only when we were just a few steps away. We picked up the first egg we came to and gently lowered it into the water. It stood on its pointed tip at the bottom of the bucket—an egg with early chick development, according to Neimee. We slowly moved around the island picking up and testing eggs. The noddies always returned to their eggs as soon as we replaced them, just as Neimee had said they would. Young chicks were scattered around on the rocks among the eggs, waiting for a food delivery from their parents. After more than an hour of looking we didn’t find a single egg that sank convincingly to the bucket’s bottom, so gave up the enterprise. Nemiee said that it was not only because they had harvested eggs a few days earlier but also because it was now past the noddies prime laying season.

The time had come for Herwig and Monika to leave the island, even though it was still cyclone season and they would be taking some risk by sailing out of the equatorial latitudes. They seemed to be ready for a change, but had little choice in any case because after nearly five months they were running critically low on many key provisions. Nobody with a fishhook, spear or net will ever starve to death on Kanton, but they were craving variety in their diet and with the supply ship not expected soon they couldn’t even re-provision with basic staples. The occasion of their leaving required a farewell party of course, and the islanders went all out, even butchering one of their small pigs.

The killing of a pig was an infrequent event on Kanton. They didn’t raise many because they had little to feed them beyond fish guts and coconuts. When one was slaughtered it had to be consumed entirely within just a few days due to the lack of refrigeration. They didn’t practice the techniques of smoking and salting pork, but instead re-heated what remained from the initial feast until it was no longer fresh enough to eat. Fresh pork was a real delicacy after a few weeks of fish, lobster, crab and turtle.

The party was a bittersweet affair. Everybody was in a festive mood, but the islanders had grown close to Herwig and Monika and everyone knew they would never meet again in this life. A feast of fresh pork, lobster, fish and all the typical side dishes was laid out on the rickety old wooden picnic table at what had become the common area at the north end of the wharf. Kava was drunk, music was played and tearful farewell speeches were made by Herwig and the island men. It was a preview of what we could expect when it came our turn to sail away.

Once Monja had weighed anchor we were the sole remaining entertainment for the islanders. They did consider us a form of entertainment, or at least a distraction, which made sense, because if not for us they would be stuck on this little speck of coral with only the same small group with whom they had already spent months, and in some cases, years. They began to show increased interest in us as soon as Monja sailed out the pass. Each faction invited us to church on Sundays, and to be polite, we often went. We had to make sure that we split our visits equally between the Catholics and the Protestants, or feelings would be hurt and animosity might arise. The question of where we would go to celebrate Easter was a delicate one. Each faction wanted us to come to their church for a feast and they were fully prepared to engage in a pig killing competition to attract us, if necessary. We solved the problem by compromising. We told the Protestants that we would, unfortunately, have to go to the Catholics’ feast on Easter because they had asked us first, but if they could plan a party later we would really prefer to feast with them. That seemed to make everybody happy and so we were the guests of honor at pig-feasts two weekends in a row.

We were fond of the islanders but all the competition for our affection soon became suffocating. We told them we were going to strike out for a while to explore more of the atoll on our own. They took the news with equanimity. We eased out of the wharf anchorage heading southeast and spent half a day eyeballing Caribee through an obstacle course of coral heads to a new anchorage on the British side, down by the south beach, almost two miles from the wharf. All alone at last, we could breathe again. In our new location it seemed we were the only two people alive in the world. Weeks passed without us seeing any of the islanders, even from a distance.

We once again delved into the fantastic underwater world of Kanton’s lagoon. We snorkeled on all the reefs in the vicinity of the pass, the part of the lagoon with the clearest water and the most fish and marine life. Every time we rolled out of the dingy with our snorkel gear clouds of fish surrounded us. There were massive schools of snapper of every species imaginable. Grouper and coral trout peeked their heads from under almost every ledge. Giant black trevally swam in the pass from the ocean to feed on the clouds of small fry before heading back out to the outer reef. There were octopi, manta rays, sharks, turtles and dolphins. We saw lionfish clinging to the underside of a coral ledge in the pass at slack water. The beautiful but highly venomous fish were clumped together in a group of five, their long, plume-like arrangement of fins waving in the current like blades of grass in a gentle breeze. Everywhere we turned was a virtual wonderland of marine life unlike anything we have ever seen, before or since.

We hit upon the idea of taking a free, high-speed, long-distance snorkeling tour by motoring the dinghy out to the ocean, waiting until the turn of the tide and riding the reversing current back into the lagoon. As the time of low slack water approached we eased Liz out to the ocean end of the pass and jumped over the side with our fins, masks and snorkels. Waiting for the tide to turn, we each kept one hand on the dinghy’s gunwale while gazing down at a school of goatfish rooting for food in the sandy bottom. The water suddenly turned gin clear and began to pour in from the open sea, gaining speed by the minute. At first we hovered near the edge of the stream to give it time to pick up steam before jumping into the flow. When it was running fast we grabbed hold of Liz’s painter and kicked hard with our fins, propelling the dinghy out into the rushing tidal stream. The current instantly seized total control and zipped us away from the ocean, shooting us toward the inner lagoon. The bottom rolled quickly past thirty feet below, accelerating. This was a blast! We were zooming over more coral formations in minutes than we could have swum by in an hour. Clouds of fish surrounded us, some becoming fellow travelers in the stream. A large school of mutton snapper and another smaller one of queen triggerfish followed along, apparently interested in this strange thing bobbing in the current.

Then I heard Cheryl squeal into her snorkel. I spun my head around and looked behind me. Nothing. I turned back to see a gray and white curtain of skin inches from my mask, totally filling my field of vision. Oh shit! My heart caught in my throat. Was it a great white? Cheryl screamed again. I popped my head up out of the water. She came up at the same time and she was laughing.

“Did you see it?” She asked, taking the snorkel from her mouth.

“What was that?”

“A giant manta ray. It scared the hell out of me, I thought it was a big shark.”

“That’s what I thought it was.”

“Look, here it comes again.”

I jammed the snorkel back in my mouth and stuck my head under. The massive creature passed close by us again. It seemed to be trying to figure out what we were. It must have been twelve feet across; this close it looked gigantic. It swam back and forth for some time, eyeing us with apparent curiosity. It had a slow, ponderous, gentle way of moving and I felt somehow comforted to have it around. It must have become bored with us because it made one last pass before swimming away, fighting the current to get back to the open sea. Our accompanying school of snapper was still with us when our speed started dropping. The current dispersed into the lagoon. Our speed slowed to a crawl. Today’s ride was over.

The islanders were thrilled when the supply ship finally arrived one morning, not just because they wanted the goodies it carried but also because many of the passengers bound for Christmas Island were friends and relatives. The ship’s captain had been in radio contact with Riino, so its arrival was expected. The men had caught many fish and lobster the night before and had set up cooking drums and open fires at the wharf to cook for their visitors. Children were laughing and playing and there was a festive atmosphere when the forty-foot open launch chugged through the pass and pulled alongside the wharf to let the first load of passengers disembark. Twenty or so men, women and children clamored off the boat and were cheerfully greeted by the islanders as the launch quickly swung away from the wharf and headed back out for another load. We went ashore, too, to greet the travelers and join in the festivities. Everyone seemed very happy to get ashore.

Cheryl and I climbed to the top of one of the huge, rusting old fuel tanks that stood off to the west of the wharf. It was about the size and shape of a municipal water tank, maybe a hundred feet high with a spiral staircase winding up its side that was so rusty that we had to test the steps before putting our full weight on them. When we reached the top we had an unobstructed view of the anchored supply ship lying about a quarter-mile offshore. The most immediate and overwhelming impression was of rust. The ship had once been white, probably, but there was so much rust streaking the topsides, decks and superstructure that it just looked like a rusty-orange hulk with a little dirty white mixed in. It may not have been the worst looking derelict I had ever seen but it was the definitely the worst one still floating and in operation. We watched as the launch tied up alongside and another bunch of eager passengers scrambled over the rail and down the ladder.





Back on the wharf a real party was underway. Our Kanton friends introduced us to several of their extended family members and friends from Tarawa. Fish, lobster and pork were frying, boiling and roasting and everybody was having a grand time. The Asian buyers had come ashore and were paying cash on the steel-drum head for the dried yellow-fin tuna fillets, sea cucumbers and shark fins that the islanders had been hoarding. They were rich now, ready to spend on fresh provisions.

After the launch dropped yet another load of passengers at the wharf Frank asked if we would like to go with him to the ship on the return trip, for a tour and to meet the captain. Cheryl demurred. The spectacle of the anchored rust-bucket was fresh in her mind, but I was intrigued. I’d never had an up-close look at an authentic South Pacific tramp steamer and it looked like the best entertainment to be had that day in any case.

“Do you think I should buy anything off the ship?” I asked Cheryl.

“Oh, I guess you could pick up a dozen pamplemousse.”

“Very funny. They won’t have anything fresh at all, not from Tarawa, except maybe onions or potatoes.”

“Well, just see what they have and get anything you think we need.”

I boarded the launch with Frank and a couple of the other island men and we chugged out the pass to board the ship. The smell hit me as soon as my head cleared the top rung of the ship’s ladder—a malodorous blend of sun-dried urine, rancid vomit and stale human grease, all overlaid with the distinctive stench of what I immediately recognized as pig shit. Nothing else smells quite like it, and once you’ve smelled it you don’t forget. In my naivety I thought it an incongruous shipboard odor. Then I heard a squeal and saw the rear end of a scrawny Philippine spring-back sow disappear around the corner of the superstructure that was separated from the ship’s high gunwales by a narrow side deck. There were blue plastic tarps stretched over the deck/walkway in several places, covering pallets and mats where passengers had been sleeping outside in the weather, apparently alongside the hogs. These were the steerage berths, the cheap seats, and for all I know they were the only berths because I didn’t see any evidence of cabins. No wonder the passengers were so anxious to get ashore. They were ten days out of Tarawa and had at least as long to go before reaching Christmas, with this the only possible stop. Looking around at the general decay and squalor it was no surprise that it had taken so long for the ship to cover less than a thousand miles. The surprising thing was that it had made it at all. I wouldn’t have given very long odds that it would make it to Christmas Island, either.

I followed Frank along the walkway, through a port and up a steel staircase to the bridgedeck. Two Gilbertese men were sitting on bar stools and gazing through big, greasy, plate-glass windows that offered a blurry view of the bow and the atoll beyond. They turned to greet us and Frank introduced one as the ship’s captain and the other as its mate. I smiled, shook hands and told the captain that everyone on the island was very happy to see the ship arrive right on time. He smiled broadly and thanked me. If he detected any sarcasm he didn’t let it show. He asked if I wanted to buy any supplies. After hearing a listing of what was available all I took were a few cans of tinned butter and an overpriced case of Australian beer. The only other goods they had were either already spoken for or were items with which we were still well enough supplied or in which we had no interest.

The festivities at the wharf continued for several days after the ship left, mainly because the islanders were now well stocked with beer, kava and pre-opened bottles of American whisky, or so they were labeled. The Protestants, especially, were in king-hell boogie mode and made no effort to conserve anything, going full tilt for four days until all their party supplies were exhausted. Then, for the men, it was back to the sameness of long days in the hammock or on the matt, along with some occasional fishing. For the women, it was back to daily chores.

No account of Kanton would be complete without a word about the fishing. It was simply outstanding, like nowhere else I’ve seen or heard about. The first time we took Liz out trolling we headed toward the pass, as we would typically do, expecting to have the best luck at the confluence of the lagoon and the open ocean. We motored away from Caribee using our usual method of trailing a couple of lures on hand lines, one on each side of the dinghy. Before we had gone a hundred feet both lures were slammed by simultaneous strikes. We quickly boated two blue trevally and the day’s fishing expedition was over. It was too easy, almost no fun. Time after time the experience was much the same. It got to the point that we started to view blue trevally as trash fish. They were so aggressive about taking our lures that we had trouble giving more desirable species a chance to make it to our dinner table. Our Pacific fish guidebook told us “the blue trevally is highly sought after for its excellent eating qualities”, but we find that they taste a bit too fishy and prefer the delicate flavor and texture of coral trout in particular, but also snapper. We released countless trevally in our quest for other fish, but we did finally perfect ways of catching the ones we wanted. Kanton was the only place we’ve been where the biggest fishing problem is that it’s too easy to catch fish. It makes you wonder what fishing must be like on the several uninhabited atolls of the Phoenix Group.





By and by our time to sail away arrived. We were low on almost everything and the cyclone season was winding down. As much as we had reveled in the desolate splendor of this atoll, we were missing society and craving some of the comforts of civilization. A bite of junk food sounded like a really good idea. We told our hosts that we would have to be leaving soon, and of course they planned a party.

A hog was butchered and lobsters were gathered in great abundance. We contributed two chocolate cakes, using the very last of our special ingredients to bake them. We also baked loaves of bread, as did the islanders. They fried fish and made coconut dishes, breadfruit dishes and rice.

They’d hand-sewn traditional clothes for us to wear at the party and then take with us when we left. They gave us still more shell ornaments to take as special mementos, so that we might never forget them. Small chance of that. They had scraped up enough powdered kava for one more celebration and once again they played the guitar and the ukulele and sang and danced. We gave our heartfelt speeches and they gave theirs. Everyone was smiling but there was a profound sadness underneath it all. It was the sadness of time lost and time still slipping away, never to be reclaimed. They had been through this too many times before and knew even better than we that it wasn’t just the end of one thing that we mourned but the end of all things, the end of every day that is gone and will never come again. We had sailed into their lives and they had welcomed us like family. It truly hurt them to see us go. It hurt us to leave. We wondered if we would ever experience anything even remotely like this again. The party went on until the wee hours of the morning. Nobody wanted it to end.





Virtually the entire settlement was standing on the wharf the next day as we weighed anchor and headed for the pass. The children ran along the wharf beside us, waving and whooping as we slipped out of their lives forever. A few of the adults followed along on bicycles and motorbikes. When they reached the end of the wharf they stood and waved as they watched us grow smaller in the distance. We watched them slowly fade until they, and finally Kanton itself, slipped below the horizon and there was only the sea.





The Wave





I was floating in that pleasant zone between dreaming and wakefulness one sunny Samoan morning when a low shaking rumble jolted my eyes open. I turned to Cheryl with a questioning look, but she wasn’t there. Struggling to make sense of the commotion, I thought, ‘she must be running in place on the foredeck.’ I was mulling over that dubious notion when she stuck her head through the cabin doorway and said, “I think it’s an earthquake.”

I jumped out of the bunk and went through the head compartment into the cabin. Vibration continued to rattle the hull and rigging. Sea foam bubbled up through the drains of the head and galley sinks. The shaking and noise just kept on going until finally, after three long minutes, all was still.

“Is the radio on channel sixteen?” I said.

“I turned it on when I got up.”

Somebody starting transmitting, asking if anybody knew what was happening. There was a round of radio chatter among boats about an earthquake but nobody knew any more than we did. On shore I saw that traffic had stopped on the narrow highway rimming the harbor and a few people stood in their front yards looking dazed. The gurgling of our stovetop percolator and the distant yelp of a car alarm were the only sounds.

“Could there be a tsunami?” Cheryl asked. We had just seen a TV documentary about the Pacific Ring of Fire while back in the States. The Pacific has a lot more tsunamis than most parts of the world but they’re still rare and most earthquakes don’t cause one. I really didn't know.

“I’ll turn on the radio and see what they’re saying.” I flipped on the stereo receiver and saw that it was already tuned to the commercial station we sometimes monitored for local news. The announcer was reporting that there had been a strong earthquake in the area but no tsunami was expected. The statement was repeated in Samoan.

“Should we leave,” Cheryl said, “and go out to deep water?” We would be safe from a tsunami in deep water, where any wave would be nothing more than a long swell and probably not even noticeable.

“The radio said they don’t expect a wave,” I said, “and anyway, the prop is still bagged. There’s all that lashing on the mooring pennant, too.”

We had left Caribee swinging to a sturdy mooring in Pago Pago harbor while away for a three-month visit with our families. Before leaving I had bagged the propeller with a thick plastic garbage bag to thwart barnacle growth in the notoriously dirty harbor. I’d also lashed the heavy mooring pennant to our foredeck cleats with a web of backup lines in case a storm should strike while we were away. We had just returned a few days earlier and all these measures were still in place. It would take quite an effort to quickly clear everything and get underway, including an especially unappealing early morning dive into filthy water to cut away the garbage bag.

The VHF chatter had died down by the time we poured our coffee. The local radio personalities were speculating about possible earthquake damage but didn’t have any confirmed reports yet. I looked across the bay and saw that none of the twenty or so moored, anchored and docked sailboats in the harbor had gotten underway. Everybody seemed to have calmed down. We took our first sips of hot coffee.

A woman’s voice on the VHF said, “Should we be doing something?”

“It’s too late now,” came a man’s reply.

“What are they talking about?” As Cheryl spoke we felt Caribee lurch and heel slightly to port as she started to swing around.

We rushed into the cockpit to see that her bow had swung around half-circle and was now pointed toward the head of the bay, not lying to the light breeze anymore. She was pointing into an ebbing current. We watched in silence, transfixed, as the flow accelerated. My heart caught in my throat and my pulse started to race.

“The water’s falling,” I said, stating the obvious. Cheryl looked dazed, like maybe she didn’t know what it meant, but I knew she did. “It’s running out of the bay. There’s a tsunami coming.”

“What do we do?” There was alarm in her voice.

“We can’t... Just wait and be ready.”

“Don’t tell me that. What do we do? What do you mean, be ready? Be ready to do what?”

“I don’t know,” I said. “Just try to be ready to do whatever we have to.”

“I’ll get the life jackets out of the locker. Let’s put them on.”

“It won’t matter. If we...”

“What? What do you mean?”

“I just mean make sure you don’t fall in the water,” I said. “Lifejackets are a good idea.”

She jerked our life jackets from a cockpit locker and handed one to me. We put them on as we watched the big harbor drain like a bathtub that’d had its plug pulled. There was excited chatter on the radio but it was just background noise to us now. I was hyper-alert to our surroundings, adrenalin clearing my head better than any amount of caffeine could have. The water had dropped quite a lot already and the only sound I really heard was the soft rattle of small stones and seashells near shore as the receding water washed over them.

We dropped farther still. The stream ran faster, flushing the big bowl of a harbor. Wild thoughts raced, the next one coming before I could seize on the last. I began to worry that Caribee might actually hit the bottom and topple over onto her side. It had been thirty-five feet deep under her keel before the bay started to empty. How far would the water drop? I reached for the depth sounder switch but Cheryl’s next words caught me short.

“Are we gonna die?”

“I don’t know.” Wrong answer. She was staring at me, hard. “I don’t really know what’s going to happen. I think we’ll be okay, just keep watching everything and we’ll do whatever we have to. No, we are not going to die.”

She didn’t look calmed. I doubt that my demeanor inspired confidence. I knew a tsunami wave was coming but how big would it be? Twenty feet? Fifty? It did no good to worry about it. Just watch and wait.

“I’m going to swim to shore.” She was scanning the shoreline with a look in her eye that said she was really thinking about it. Like she was choosing the shortest route. I grabbed her arm.

“Are you crazy? Calm down. Nobody could swim in that current. A wave is on the way and we don’t know how big it is. The boat’s floating so it’ll rise with the wave. It’s the only safe place now, so don’t panic and we’ll be fine. Don’t fall in the water and sure don’t jump in it.”

I swiveled my head back and forth, looking in every direction, trying to keep up with what was unfolding, thinking: how much is the water level falling, how fast is the current running, are any boats dragging anchor, is a wave coming from the mouth of the bay yet? We now looked up at a considerable angle to a shoreline that had been at eye level just minutes earlier. The ocean seemed to be swallowing us. The water had already dropped twenty feet, maybe more. Or maybe it just seemed like that much? I saw that two or three of the boats that had been anchored farther into the bay were now lying on their sides in brown muck. Bizarre scenes everywhere. It was fascinating and it was horrifying. Of course we knew about tsunamis but never thought we would be in one, and I still couldn’t really accept that it was happening. The mind doesn’t believe what the eyes see. I thought again of checking the depth sounder but still didn’t turn it on. I don’t know why. Maybe I didn’t want to know. It wouldn’t matter anyway.

The current stilled abruptly. The rattling of seashells stopped and it grew deathly quiet and I knew it was coming soon. A dog barked in the distance. We waited, tense, braced for impact, but for the longest time nothing happened. I almost dared to hope that nothing would. Maybe the water would just slowly flow back in the way it had gone out.

Caribee lurched as her bow swung smartly toward the mouth of the bay again. Water was racing in now, the flood gathering speed much faster than it had on the way out. She bucked in the ripping stream, at once rolling, pitching and yawing. Liz was tied bow and stern along her starboard side and the violence jerked the dinghy’s stern cleat cleanly out of its mount. Restrained only by her bow painter she shot forward, somehow propelled into the rushing water, then came up short on that line and surfed back toward us, stern first. Her up-tilted outboard slammed into Caribee’s topsides and shattered its aluminum mount, tearing it from the dinghy and shattering Caribee’s starboard caprail. I shot a glance aft and saw a full breaking wave a few boat-lengths behind us, a giant, curling, surfers’ wave, right in the middle of the anchorage. It rudely snapped up and tumbled the yachts that had been lying on the dry seabed. Fiberglass and aluminum cracked like breaking bones. We heard wails over the roar of the crashing wave; screaming sailors. Our friends.

The flood kept coming, rocketing past us at a frightening pace, but we held fast to our mooring. Caribee slewed hard from port to starboard as the raging waters assumed absolute control, dipping each rail below the muddy maelstrom in turn. First one side deck and then the other scooped up nasty water as her hull speed was exceeded by a large margin. The motion grew increasingly violent. Water washed into the cockpit. The power and fury of this much water moving this fast was unlike anything we had known, even in stormy seas. Glassware crashed and shattered below, books flew out of their cases and piled up on the cabin sole. We had to hold tight to whatever we could grab just to stay aboard the bucking boat. Our mooring was very strong but never meant for anything like this. I knew that if it broke we would be washed ashore, or worse. The water rose higher and the bow got pulled down as the mooring lines lost scope. I started to worry that the water might rise so high that our bow would be pulled completely under and the boat would sink. I dived into the cabin and came back up from the mess holding a serrated bread knife in case I had to cut the pennant. It would set us adrift but we wouldn’t sink, not right away at least. I waited for a massive wave to strike but there was only this roaring torrent that tossed us about like a child’s toy. Farther in, in the more shallow part of the bay, the wave was well developed. Boats anchored there took the full brunt of it, but we were in water just deep enough to avoid that fate.

“It’s a mess down there,” I said. “Everything is breaking loose.”

Cheryl made a dash below but quickly returned, her foot bleeding from a glass cut.

“Let’s put on our running shoes to protect our feet,” I said. “If we do somehow end up ashore we may have to run.”

Everywhere we looked the land was inundated by ten or twenty feet of water. Houses imploded, buildings collapsed as their bottom floors were knocked out, cars and trucks were swept away and trees were toppled. Then the water grew still once more in a perverse mockery of high-tide slack water as the massive deluge paused momentarily before pouring off the land and back into the bay. It did not return home empty-handed. As the receding flood rolled off the land it carried vehicles, pieces of buildings, shipping containers, logs, animals and people. Once the deluge had receded below the level of the land the shoreline became a black waterfall of sludge pouring into the bay. The water carried so much refuse that it seemed there was nothing else, as if you might walk across its surface on a carpet of floating rubbish. It didn’t stop receding when it reached normal sea level but fell farther and farther down, just as it had before the wave.





As the flooded land dried we saw the little Nor’Sea twenty-seven-footer Eva lying on her side by the highway where she’d been deposited by the retreating wave. We’d met the father and son crew, Michael and Gerald, just the day before at their anchorage near Caribee. I saw that they were now running up a steep hill behind Eva, one of them wearing only underwear. From the way they were moving they looked uninjured.

A sailboat dragged its anchor toward us at high speed. It looked like it could be making ten knots, its anchor not even slowing it down. As it got closer I could see that impact was inevitable. I winced as a Westsail 32 slammed into our portside bow with a savage crash, shattering our teak caprail. She bounced off and zipped past, dragging toward the mouth of the bay, thankfully not hooking our mooring with her anchor. As she was swept away her captain stood in the cockpit screaming obscenities and flipping us the finger with both hands, as if we had somehow unjustly caused him injury by being stationary in his path.

I ran forward to survey the damage. The port caprail was toast but the hull looked okay. A quick check below revealed that there was no water coming in. Back in the cockpit we watched in a daze as the flotsam-choked water kept falling. A look at the rising shoreline hinted that it might fall as far as it had before. That’s when it dawned on me that there would be a second wave; it was inevitable now with the water dropping so much.

Sure enough, the current stopped, stilled, reversed. A second onslaught barreled toward us, this one packed with floating missiles hefty enough to do serious damage. I saw a partially submerged shipping container a hundred yards in front of our bow. We watched helplessly as it careened our way, gaining speed by the second. If a sharp corner of that steel box caught our hull it would rip a hole right through it and leave us sinking in this swirling mess. We dodged a bullet when it passed just twenty feet to starboard and continued on its mission to batter more buildings in town.

The flood peaked and the water poured off the land once more, like an overturned punchbowl pouring off a table. It swept away buildings and cars that had somehow been spared in the first assault, or else they had made the round trip out and back in and were now starting the next leg of an unwanted journey. Caribee’s bow snapped back around to point into the retreating slurry. Most of the wreckage missed us, passing to one side or the other, but a few smaller pieces pelted our hull. When nothing of size impacted us I hoped that maybe we were past the worst of it. The water continued to fall until it was below sea level for the third time, but not as far as it had before the first two waves. I thought the next one would surely be smaller and the fact that we were still holding tight to our mooring was a very good sign.





“I think we’ll be alright now,” I said. “We’re going to make it.” Cheryl didn’t answer but the terror in her eyes had changed to something more like hope.

The current stilled and we braced for the third wave. It came strong and fast again, which surprised me a little. If it was any weaker than the first two it was hard to tell it. I scanned the harbor to see what would be coming our way next and for the first time noticed the two big, rusty, steel fishing vessels that were drifting side-by-side in front of us. I blinked and looked again, trying to judge their distance. They weren’t really that far away, maybe two hundred yards. How could I have missed them before? They must have been there. They looked like twins, maybe two hundred feet long and rafted together, with what looked like Chinese characters painted on their bows, or at least I thought it might be Chinese. I thought, ‘Siamese twins,’ and smiled inwardly, inappropriately, considering they were headed straight toward us. I wondered why they didn’t just unraft and power away?

“I think we have a problem,” I said.

“What?” Alarm was back in Cheryl’s voice.

I pointed toward the two vessels that had now pivoted in the current until they were almost beam to our bow. “They’re coming down on us. I hope the current reverses or they motor away before they get here.” We watched, entranced by their slow, ponderous but relentless approach. When they were a hundred yards away, maybe less, I said, “Okay, they’re still coming. We have to get out of their way. If they hit us they’ll go right over us and drag us under their hulls and crush us. I have to start the engine now, can’t wait.”

I’d hoped we wouldn’t have to start the engine. I figured there was a good chance that the seawater intake would clog immediately, considering all the stuff that was suspended in the water. Not only that, the prop was bagged and even if we did manage to shred the plastic with the propeller and gain some thrust we would most likely wrap a length of floating rope or something else around the prop. If we lost power for any reason after releasing the mooring we would be at the mercy of the currents and probably end up on shore somewhere in the wreckage of town. As the big steel hulks drifted ever closer I could see that we no longer had a choice.

I turned the key and the Kubota sprang to life. Luckily, it almost always starts easily; this was no time for a balky engine. We watched the steady approach of the ships—that’s really what they were, small ships, not boats—while I kept one eye glued to the temperature gauge, alert for the first signs of overheating. I had already decided to let the engine overheat and even burn up if necessary in order to escape, but I sure hoped it didn’t come to that. The wind was so light sailing was out of the question.

We watched the slow motion calamity unfold, willing the rafted ships to stop their advance or slide off to one side, but it was clear that wasn’t going to happen. A throng of Asian crewmembers appeared at the rail of the closest ship, dangling a rope ladder over the side and motioning for us to climb up. They seemed to understand that Caribee might be pulled under their hull on impact. It was the sight of that ladder that finally galvanized me into action.

“I’m cutting the mooring pennant,” I yelled over my shoulder as I ran up the side deck, knife in hand. No way were we going to try to lunge for a flimsy rope ladder and leave Caribee to be crushed. I sawed at the thick line with the serrated blade. The taut strands snapped like rubber bands as its teeth slid across them. The pennant parted and we were free, adrift in the swirl of junk. Before the last cord of nylon snapped I shouted, “Full throttle, reverse!”

The little Japanese diesel whined as Cheryl threw the throttle all the way down. The propeller spun furiously. The ships weren’t approaching as fast as they had been but were still closing the gap at an alarming rate. I had hesitated for too long and now they were going to hit us and there was nothing we could do about it. When they were twenty feet away the crew pulled up the rope ladder and dangled some large inflatable ball fenders in its place. They were swinging them around by lengths of line, trying to position them between Caribee and the side of their ship when the steel hull struck our bow with a sickening crunch of fiberglass and the shriek of stainless steel being wrenched out of shape. We were thrown off balance as the impact shoved the boat hard astern. I put the helm over and gave her full throttle in forward. Slowly, very slowly, we gained steerageway and were able to keep a steady boat-length from the encroaching ships. At maximum revs we were making about one knot, at best. I knew it was the ball of shredded plastic bag around the prop that was holding us back, but at that point was happy to have any thrust at all. With a little luck we might actually survive this. At least we were taking action and had some control.

I aimed our battered bow deeper into the bay, the drifting ships following, hulking above our transom. I wanted to turn in the opposite direction and head toward deeper water, not go further into the bay, but first we had to get around the ships. We were making progress but it was agonizingly slow, like a nightmare where you run ever harder but keep stumbling as the monster breathes down your neck.

We crept away from the ships at an angle, trying to get around the end of the raft-up. At last we made it and I immediately swung the bow toward deep water. The water stopped flooding in and calmed again. I kept one eye on the temperature gauge while dodging the biggest rafts of rubbish. The engine was still running cool at full throttle and there was plenty of water coming from the exhaust. I started to breath easier once again.

“I don’t think we’re in the harbor,” Cheryl said.

“What? How can you tell?”

“Look at those houses on the hillside. Aren’t they beside the soccer field?”

I scanned the shoreline, found a few familiar landmarks and realized she was right. “We have to get into the harbor before the water goes down or we’ll be hard aground.”

The engine was redlined and still we just edged along. With a clean prop she would have been doing over six knots. The flood had fully crested now and was poised to rush out. When it started ebbing it gave us a boost and we picked up some speed over the bottom. It’s a good thing we did because soon black water was cascading off the land just a hundred feet behind our stern. A hundred feet, three boat lengths. It was the difference between floating free and being hard aground on a field of devastation with another wave likely on the way.

We inched steadily into deeper water but weren’t out of the woods yet. I expected the prop to wrap something at any minute and add Caribee to the mass of drifting flotsam carpeting the harbor. I could steer around the larger pieces but the rest we just had to power through. As we got farther out into the bay we saw open patches of water, still brown and nasty but free of debris. Soon it was clear enough that we could steer around the remaining drifts. There were a few cruising boats and a handful of commercial vessels motoring around, escapees from the turmoil farther in. The sailboat Mainly was there. We knew Joan and Danny from back in Panama. We hadn’t seen them in two years until yesterday, when we had briefly spoken to them after we pulled our dinghy alongside Mainly, making plans to get together the next afternoon to catch up over drinks. We continued to motor around as I scanned the bay, trying to avoid the paths of other boats while in our semi-disabled state. Cheryl grabbed my arm and pointed to port.

“Look. How did they get out here?”

It was Eva, scooting past at a good clip. Michael and Gerald were both in the cockpit and Michael was grinning and waving. We gave him a wave and a thumbs-up.

“I have no vague idea how that happened. The boat was high and dry the last time I saw it and they were running up the hill. If the boat just washed back into the harbor, how come they’re on it?”

“I gotta’ hear that story.” She pointed toward the mouth of the bay and said, “See if you can get close to Mainly.”

I headed toward her but we didn’t close the distance much in our crippled state. Mainly was swinging in a big lazy circle so I angled to cut her off. When we got closer Cheryl stood on the cockpit seat and waved. Joan was at the helm. Cheryl shouted, “Are you okay?” She answered but I couldn’t hear what she said. She slowed her speed to match ours and we angled closer.

“What did she say?”

“It sounded like she said Danny’s gone.” Cheryl stood on the side deck and I eased closer. She shouted, “What?”

This time I could hear her answer.

“Danny didn’t get back on the boat. The wave caught him.” Her face was an anxious grimace.

“I bet he’s okay,” Cheryl called back to her. “We can help you get the boat anchored if you need us.”

She came back into the cockpit and said, “That doesn’t sound good, bless her heart.”

“I wonder how that happened?” I figured he must have had a good reason for being off the boat, or maybe he was ashore before he knew a wave was coming. I tried to imagine being in the water on one of those incoming waves. I thought about what I’d told Cheryl earlier; that it probably wouldn’t really matter if we were wearing life jackets if we went into the water. Was that really true? I was afraid it was. I wasn’t sure anything would help much if a wave like that carried you away. “Maybe he’s okay. He’s probably standing on shore watching his boat and worrying about Joan.”

“I hope so.”

We milled around for a while trying to calm down and decide what to do next. Cautiously, we nosed back toward the inner harbor and looked for a place to settle. The big concrete wharf was mostly empty now. Joan had taken Mainly back to her berth there and we thought that would be the best place for us too, at least in the short term. We needed a stable place where we could assess the damage. We eased in behind Mainly and tied up to the massive bollards that were set into the concrete.

Minutes later the space along the wharf was quickly filling and soon the entire quay was packed with cruising sailboats tied end to end. Dazed crewmembers spilled off boats and wandered about looking at their battered vessels and at the damage done to their neighbors, checking to see if their friends and fellow sailors were okay.

The shoreline backing the quay was a shambles. Wreckage was piled everywhere. Pools of black water stood in every low spot. Joan shaded her eyes with her hand and scanned the shore for Danny’s approach. She was growing more upset with each passing minute.

“I think he would come straight back here, don’t you?” she said.

“He might be having trouble getting through all that mess,” Cheryl said. “He’ll probably turn up soon.” She looked at me. “Don’t you think?” I said that I did.

We looked Caribee over. Her polished stainless stemhead fitting was ripped from the bow and deeply creased, its six large attachment bolts shorn off. Her forestay and lifelines hung slack and the stainless steel tubing of her bow pulpit was shoved back and twisted out of shape. There was a hole in the peak of her bow big enough to push a football through. Her port and starboard caprails were splintered and her topsides were gouged and scarred. She was unfit for sea but at least she wouldn’t sink in the harbor. We had our work cut out for us. We were facing structural repairs while trapped in the midst of a widespread catastrophe for the second time in our cruising careers and knew we were in for a hard slog. Much of the island’s infrastructure had been demolished in the blink of an eye and it would no doubt take months for life to get back to a semblance of normal.

Morning passed into noon, then afternoon, and still no Danny. When Joan could wait no longer she set off on a search, and to make inquiries with officials if she could find any. A young woman named Dubis from the boat Jubilee accompanied her. We stayed behind and tried to call our families using Skype, since we somehow still had a WiFi connection to a shoreside hotspot. Hours passed before a movement caught our eye and made us both look up at the same time to the place we had been watching for Joan and Danny to return. Joan walked small and alone onto the white concrete quay in the long afternoon light, with vacant eyes and sagging shoulders, and when we saw her we knew. We went to her as she shuffled toward Mainly. She looked through us and said, “I found Danny in the morgue.”

The next few days were tough. Most of the cruisers in Pago Pago had damaged boats, some much worse than others, and we all had to cope with trying to get things back to something approaching normality while working in hot, dusty disarray. Most of us were in a state of shock. It seemed that everybody had a horror story. The yacht Sunshine had actually surfed into the village, riding the crest of a curling wave, shooting between collapsing houses, knocking down power lines with her mast, finally coming to rest in a churchyard a quarter-mile from the harbor. Nobody in the crew of three was seriously injured. Banyan and Gallivanter were bashed and battered at the quay but their crews were likewise not injured. Tulak was carried ashore on a wave and deposited in a pile of wreckage on the soccer field that had almost trapped us, but Steve, her singlehanded captain, was likewise miraculously unhurt. We learned that the two ships that smashed our bow were already disabled when the tsunami struck. One had no working engine and the other no working transmission. They had been rafted together and making repairs when they broke free of the tuna cannery dock. They were now aground at the head of the bay.





A pall hung over our little fleet. The loss of one of our own was a weight felt by everyone at the wharf and the cruisers at anchor in the bay. That first guilty thrill of being alive and unharmed was now tempered by the certain knowledge that it could have been any one of us that didn’t make it. Everybody pulled together to help each other out the way cruisers will, and especially to help Joan. Still, the damage was widespread and everyone had to give priority to his or her own problems. There was no water at the dock and no electricity anywhere except onboard the yachts, which are self-sufficient in that respect.

Nightfall brought utter blackness in the town and the surrounding hills. Spooky, alien sounds of a battered community drifted on the breeze. Only the odd distant fire, the occasional sweep of a flashlight beam or the headlights of a passing car cut the darkness. At first we worried about looters. We heard about hits on Korean shopkeepers, and there were reported attempts against a couple of the beached yachts. We slept with machetes and baseball bats close at hand, but after a few nights with no security problems we all relaxed. The vast majority of the Samoans behaved splendidly, eager to help us in any way they could even though most had grave problems of their own.

The American cruisers in port figured it was a stroke of luck that this happened to us where it did. We were U.S. citizens in American territory, so after President Obama declared American Samoa a disaster area we knew that FEMA would step in with relief. We woke up every morning expecting to see the Feds flying in with money and equipment, but after a string of days with no sign of government action we started to despair. Didn’t they know people were suffering here? Thirty-three Samoans had been killed outright on Tutuila alone, and scores, at least, were injured and homeless. Stockpiles of food were running low. What were they waiting for? There was no help whatsoever forthcoming from the local government, which, with their limited resources, was not unexpected. Many of their offices had been damaged or destroyed. The Red Cross did start delivering sandwiches and water on the third day, which was a big help for anyone with bare cupboards, but many people needed more comprehensive help.

While we all waited for the cavalry to arrive, those of us with damaged boats struggled to make repairs. We had fiberglass, epoxy, extra stainless steel bolts and some plywood onboard Caribee, so could manage a good start to our projects. What we couldn’t do was cut, straighten and weld the stainless steel bow pulpit. All the welding shops had been flattened, and anyway, there was no electricity to run arc welders. The pulpit would need to be repaired before we put to sea, but that could wait. We worked on the most pressing problems, concentrating on repairing the hole in the bow and reattaching the deformed stemhead fitting.

Humid days crept by, the island slowly dug out of the rubble and the cruisers coalesced into a tight-knit community. With a few notable exceptions, everyone got along and tried to make the best of things. We organized movie nights on the quay, gathering around a small screen in the open air to watch DVD films, bringing our own popcorn and drinks. A few shops in Pago had generators and reopened for business. Food and supplies gradually became more readily available. Cookouts and potlucks were organized. Joan’s two sons, Wade and Cole, flew in from the States and lifted her spirits a bit.

FEMA finally showed up in force and kick-started the bureaucratic paper chase that eventually led to money being distributed to those with damaged homes, both on shore and on the water. They flew in big, roaring diesel generators that were set up all over town. Thick electrical cables ran out from them in all directions like fat black snakes covering the ground. They delivered emergency supplies and tools that were somewhat helpful, though the claw hammers and shovels didn’t get much use onboard boats.





There is often something positive that comes out of a bad situation and that was the case for Joan. Her cousin Kathy in Richmond, Virginia told her that they had a cousin, Evelyn, who lived in American Samoa and emailed her Evelyn’s phone number. Joan called her up and she came directly over to the quay in her little Volkswagen. The two had never met; Joan had no idea she had a cousin living in Samoa. Evelyn and Joan got on splendidly and as it turned out, Evelyn’s husband L’lio was chief of their village and an influential man on the island. Evelyn and L’lio took charge of Joan’s problems, making her life immeasurably easier. L’lio was particularly helpful in smoothing the arrangements for a burial at sea for Danny, including the use of a government police boat for the service.

A lovely memorial was held on the quay. All the yachties and many Samoans attended in support of Joan, Wade and Cole. It was a brilliant day and everyone was respectfully dressed in his or her finest attire. There were beautiful sprays of fresh tropical flowers. It was all extraordinarily poignant. Danny was then loaded onto the boat, along with his family, and taken offshore, where his body was committed to the depths of the blue ocean that he had loved so much.





After two months we had completed our rough repairs and sorted out our most critical issues. We found a Korean welder whose shop had washed away, but who was resourceful enough to work around that inconvenience. He bent, hammered and welded our pulpit and stemhead fitting back into shape. He used the welding equipment of a large purse seine type tuna fishing boat that was tied to the cannery dock. It was the final touch in our temporary fix. Caribee didn’t look too sharp anymore, with her abraded paint and gouged topsides, but she was seaworthy.

We sailed out of Pago Pago harbor on the second of December, sixty-two days after the tsunami walloped us, bound for the Kingdom of Tonga, just over three hundred nautical miles to the southwest. We completed entry formalities at Neiafu, in the Vava’u Group, on Cheryl’s birthday. She thought that being in a tropical kingdom where the streets were not clogged with heaps of wreckage, the clatter of diesel generators didn’t drown out conversation, and the air was not choked with the dust of a hundred tons of dried mud was a pretty special birthday present.

Some of our friends say we are the unluckiest sailors they know, listing our multiple hurricanes, lightning strikes and now a tsunami, as evidence. Maybe they’re right, but I don’t see it that way. I think we’re lucky because we’ve survived all that, and always by some small stroke of fortune that has made the difference between real disaster and just a good thumping by the sea, a little something to get our attention so we don’t forget who’s boss.

◆◆◆



We were hit by yet another storm in Neiafu that summer, cyclone Rene, the Valentine's Day storm. Even though it came right over us and caused widespread damage ashore it seemed to lose much of its punch at the last minute. The effects and drama in the harbor were minimal. After the storm season ended we sailed to Fiji, some four hundred miles to the west. We fell instantly in love with Fiji and it became our latest favorite country. Soon after our arrival there new obligations to aging family members dictated that we return to the States, and for several years we divided our time between Fiji and America, storing the boat securely while we were away and returning to sail among the beautiful islands and reefs whenever the pull of Mother Ocean became too strong.

We recently made the difficult decision to sell our beloved Caribee, feeling that unless we were able to cruise her full time again it just didn’t make sense to keep her stored and lightly used in such a faraway place. As for our future plans, as always, they are drawn with a stick in beach sand at low tide.


*** END OF THIS TEXT Half Fast   ***