Title:Bagpipes and Ferries
Author:Churchill, Nancy
Gender of Author: Female
Publication Year:2021
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2021
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: B038
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/Bagpipes-Ferries-Western-Scotland-Isles-ebook/dp/B095MTZJQP/ref=sr_1_1?crid=A4TFPDVTSZFS&keywords=Bagpipes+and+Ferries%3A+Western+Scotland+and+the+Isles&qid=1671359759&s=digital-text&sprefix=bagpipes+and+ferries+western+scotland+and+the+isles%2Cdigital-text%2C290&sr=1-1


*** START OF THIS TEXT Bagpipes and Ferries  ***



CHAPTER I. Way of the Red Roses





My memories of the Hebrides have never faded. The train from Glasgow to Oban. Short train platforms along empty fields. A forest stop with no platform at all. The train shudders to a halt. A man in tweed jacket and cloth cap backs down the train ladder, jumps to the ground, turns, and walks into the woods. The conductor waves a single goodbye. The isolation of Oban. The connectedness of Oban to the islands. A warm-up ride to the Kerrera ferry where a sliding board tells the ferryman: White, come; Black, I am just visiting. An Indian dinner before the midnight embarkation on the MV Lord of the Isles. The ferry leaves, a sign for my shipmates to speak only Gaelic. I was in one Scotland. I am now in another.

A pounding crossing, bow under the waves, water flowing down the sides of the ship. Waves so big they inundate the open hold and soak my bike. I stand crouched outside to watch the stormy sea, dawn, and the Isle of Barra. A disembarkation past boxes of lobsters, mussels, cockles, all waiting to be eaten on the Continent. Cycling back in time with animals ploughing and men broadcasting seed by hand. My tent beside a pristine stream. One evening, in the gloaming, a magical piper plays and plays.

That was thirty-five years ago. What I have forgotten, is how I came to be there. I have no Scottish heritage. Scotland was not a prime cycle touring destination. The genesis of that first trip is a mystery. What I do know is that three weeks was not enough. I dreamt of going back. Life intervened. Work, children, work, school, family, more work, and other distractions. Over decades, my desire to return endured. Now with children grown and old age on the doorstep, I feel a heightened urgency.

I have seen others with regrets, sudden illnesses, and unexpected deaths. I don’t want to join them. I begin to talk about a return trip. The reaction is mixed, mostly horrified. “Alone, Scotland, camping in the wilderness. Are you out of your mind?” I stop talking. I research cycle touring and find much has changed. Equipment choices are daunting. Bike diversity is overwhelming. My finances are depressing. I am torn by the seduction of this adventure and the growing realisation of its challenging practicalities. Then a dear friend dies. A month after her retirement. She was so full of life. She had so many plans. I know she would have wanted me to move forward with mine.

I do. Surreptitiously, I begin the process of acquiring equipment. At 500 items, it is not a small list. The list organically grows and shrinks. Decisions are made. How much does this weigh? Where will that fit? What must I carry? What do I want? Experiments commandeer my kitchen. I test the weight versus heat retention capacity of camping pots, pans, bowls, mugs, spoons, and forks. Dehydrated foods raise the question: if something tastes boring in my kitchen, might it taste delectable after a day of hard riding? I adopt the strategy of creating rooms: bedroom, closet, kitchen, bathroom, entertainment.[1] I find the bedroom (my sleeping bag and mattress) are spilling into all the other rooms. I worry incessantly about safety and buy an emergency personal responder beacon (EPRB). A fluorescent yellow, hooded, fleece jacket turns me into Big Bird. It will also make me blindingly obvious to Mountain Rescue. I start to plan where I will go and how I will get there. Scotland with its many islands looks very big. Quietly, the adventure changes from possible to inevitable. I spend every night working on lists. I go to bed with growing anticipation that this is what I must do, for me. The hell with everyone else.

I decide to take a test trip to South West England. The bike routes are well marked. People live there. Towns are short distances. I have friends who can help me if this is a fantastic mistake. It is not a fantastic mistake. It is an education. The terror of the unknown serves to curb my appetite. I lose 5kg. I become more ruthless, throwing away equipment that serves no purpose. I become less ruthless about entertainment, once carrying a library of seven books. Food is a constant worry. I am afraid I will die of starvation in Merry Olde England. This is of course impossible, since I still have 75kg to give. Nonetheless, half of what I carry is food. I anticipate freezing to death. The other half of my panniers contains my entire ski outfit, complete with beanie and gloves. I craft an expandable overflow bag on my back rack and jettison half its contents when the map shows hills ahead. I fill it up when the route is flat. I learn a bit about how to make my way in a landscape that is civilised.

I learn a little about me, too. The words “chickenshit” and “control freak” are apt. I learn that some friends do not think I am crazy. A few are envious. These invite themselves to accompany me on the first days of the main event. Only one makes it.

The one who makes it is a corker. Her name is Jane. I know very little about her, having met her at the birthday party of Evelyne, a mutual friend. Jane is a pocket rocket. For fun she walks. Her walks have covered most of the UK, Wales, and Scotland and include long distance walks of hundreds of kilometres. She appears intelligent, although signing up to go cycling with me would argue against. She also has opinions.

This is always one of the challenges of travelling with another person. They have opinions. They have needs. They also have friends who can ease the first days of the trip. I opt for convenience. I opt too soon because the opinions and needs are not long in coming. Jane’s plan is to do the Way of the Roses, a Coast to Coast route through the Yorkshire Dales. We will do it on cycles. We will leave from Morecambe. We will end at Bridlington. We will stay in B&B’s.

With the planning reins ripped out of my hands, I weigh the options. Jane’s partner Sue is willing to take all my camping gear from Bath where they live to Bridlington. The control freak thing could be a point of friction since we both are. Sue is willing to rescue us if we have an accident and suggests that one of us killing each other would qualify. Chickenshit me decides I am better off in company than I am by myself (terrorised, starving, and freezing to death). If we survive this, I can escape on a train to Scotland where I am meant to be. Alone.

A year transpires. During that time, I have repacked, booked B&B’s for the first ten days on the Way of the Roses Coast to Coast, and done any number of tasks to shut down my semi-normal life. The flight back to England begins successfully with my scoring a whole seat row. It goes downhill quickly with the vegetarian meal option. I deluded myself into thinking, as a healthy alternative, the airline would make an effort. Dinner is pureed carrots, pureed couscous, and pureed peas arranged in stripes that look exactly like the flag of Ireland. It also tastes like the flag of Ireland. Won’t be doing THAT again. I arrive at Heathrow, stay overnight, and locate the train to Bath.

Getting a bicycle onto the South West Railway can be daunting. For a guaranteed spot, you need a reservation. You need to get your bike and all its gear to the correct platform. The bike must go into the baggage car, if the train has a baggage car. This car can be at the front of the train. Or, it can be at the back. Sometimes the train does not have a baggage car, and you shove your bike into the passenger compartment.

When the train comes in, my gaze is riveted on the cars flashing by. I run to the front of the train. As I run, the width of my bike and panniers pushes annoyed people aside.

The baggage car entrance is level to the platform. Good thing because the bike and panniers weigh thirty kilograms. If I lift my chariot up into the baggage car and it accidently falls on me, I will be a squashed bug. My assigned seat on the train is eight cars away, too far to retrieve the bike at the quick stops the train makes.

In the first improper act of this trip, I sneak into the car next to the baggage car. Covered in stress sweat, I ooze into a seat.

During the trip to Bath I reflect. Sustrans is the registered charity in the UK that has been beavering away for not a very long time, achieving monumental changes in sustainable transport. One of their hallmark achievements has been the designation of thousands of kilometres of cycle routes throughout the UK. The Way of the Roses is designated by the Sustrans as a Challenge Route. It is called a Challenge Route because it is a long way (274 kilometres) and over some daunting hills, the Yorkshire Dales.

The problem is that during the intervening year, my cycle mate has fessed up. Jane has never been on a long distance cycle trip. She has been studying for several years and admits to not being very fit. This has all the hallmarks of a potential disaster. Jane is also hard to pin down on details. It took five months to extract a schedule from her, during which time every prime B&B was booked out. She has personality to spare, is enthusiastic, and determined. She also has this other thing going on that I cannot quite put my finger on.

It seems to have something to do with reality checking. Having studied Classics at Oxford, Jane is fluent in Latin and Greek. Going to a historic site with her is unnerving because she reads all the inscriptions like she is reading from the Daily Mail. She will also translate anything you want into either language, such as “Which way to the loo?” To top it all off, she is a lawyer. My reflections end when the train halts. I run to the baggage car, now a metre high off the Bath platform. As I push the bike out the door, it goes flying into the helpful conductor who is almost killed. Trying to stop my headstrong chariot, I flip out the door and land spreadeagled on the platform

Jane is waiting on the other side of the station and does not see this display of ineptitude. She is probably also reflecting. I am no lottery prize. By now she knows that she of the Classical languages is going to be spending days on end with someone who regularly uses words like “chickenshit.”

She and Sue are incredibly gracious and allow me to fill up their dining room with my bike and gear. Then Jane takes me out to the garden shed to see her bike, a cobweb-covered urban commuter bike with a flat tyre. Tomorrow is departure day. The bike does not have quick release hubs. The wheel nuts are rust-welded to the axle. Jane organises a neighbour to complete the tyre repair.

I am busy sorting my gear. What is going? What is not? Anything I leave and that does not make it to Bridlington will spell disaster for the onward portion of the trip. We have a terrific meal, which I can hardly eat for the stress, pretending this is all going to be wonderful fun. I am glad their oven is electric and not gas.

Bath is a spectacular city. A UNESCO World Heritage site. I see none of this. I am riding to my doom. The next morning we set off. The neighbour who has fixed the tyre has put it back in such a way that the brake cable jams. We are two metres into the trip. This is a fast fix, but I am thinking one flat, one cable jam…oooooohhhhh, that’s two. Is three me falling under the train? We get to the train with the thirty-two ticket stubs it is going to take us to get to northern England. Jane, riffling the tickets, resembles a diminutive card sharp.

The train roars into the station. The first challenge is loading the bikes. The train remains a metre above the platform. Jane weighs forty-five kilograms soaking wet. It is a circus. We are both stressed trying to push the bikes into the baggage car. With a delay looming, our conductor, not the one I squished the day before, decides to pitch in. We have three hours to recover from Act 1 before the next transfer.

We arrive in Birmingham where all tracks are underground. Making a connection requires an elevator ride up, finding the correct platform, and taking another elevator down. Each elevator will take one bike. The elevator speed is glacial. Several tracks are closed. Trains are rerouted or rescheduled. Including ours. We stand at Platform 11 when a rail agent shouts, “Your train is now on Track 3.” Reeking of stress sweat, we get to Track 3 in time to see our train disappear into the tunnel.

Jane is redoubtable. We do not have bike reservations for the next train that pulls in. Jane shoves her bike into the baggage car, stares down the conductor and says “WE HAVE BIKE RESERVATIONS” not mentioning that they are for another time and another train. The people who have the correct reservations decide not to tangle with Jane. The transfer at Lancaster to a spur rail train goes well.

At day’s end, we arrive at Morecambe. If Lonely Planet had a list of “Top Ten Most Depressing Places on the Planet,” Morecambe would be on it.

Morecambe is a Victorian seaside town. People have come here for decades. I would say to swim, but when we arrive the tide is out. Morecambe Beach is mudflats. All I see is mud. Hundreds, no thousands, of acres of mud. If the sea is here, it is over the horizon. We walk along the mud front to our first B&B. The owner is helpful and continues the “store your bike in the dining room” theme by having us put our bikes in hers. The entire building is transition living for Eastern Europeans looking to make their lives in the UK.

There are families with children; there are singles; there are groups of men who drink a lot of beer and make a lot of noise. It is not what I expected but, then again, everyone in the UK goes to Spain, not the mudside anymore. The arrangement is mutually beneficial to both the owner and the long term guests.

We search for dinner and find a fish and chip shop that has no seats. It is both raining and cold. We eat huddled in a bus shelter that smells faintly of urine and vomit. I cannot wait to get out of Morecambe.

I now discover one of Jane’s more endearing, and annoying, “other thing” qualities: she is relentlessly enthusiastic. I would just as soon sit in the bus shelter and bitch about dinner, our lodging, and what a crappy place I think Morecambe is. Jane, on the other hand, decides we are going to the mudflats to find a rock. We must, she says, find a rock because we take a rock from here. Then, we will throw it into the water at Bridlington. I think this a totally ludicrous idea, not only because I don’t give a shit about giving this trip any kind of ceremonial meaning but because…there are no rocks in mudflats. We spend the next forty-five minutes trying to find two rocks. I finally make an effort because it is absolutely clear: we are not going to go back to the B&B and bed until we find two rocks. Jane is delighted with the complexity, lustre, and colours of hers. I find a miniscule shard that looks like mud and convince her it measures up.

The next morning, we go downstairs to a breakfast that makes up for the night of loud drunken yelling and slamming doors. Our bikes have been moved into the hall so that everyone, including the families with children, can eat. I have been moved to a parallel universe of translocated Slavs. Everyone is pleasant, though, and there but for the Grace of God and all that. I cannot imagine how these people are going to find employment in Morecambe.

Jane has decided she must see the statue of Eric Morecambe of whom I have never heard, and who is standing in the way of my quick departure. Grumbling, I follow Jane along the waterfront to her destination as she fills me in. Eric Morecambe was born John Eric Bartholomew but adopted the surname of his home town. He then went on to be a famous comedian, so much so that the Queen unveiled this statue. It is early hours but already admirers are gathered to have their picture taken with this fanciful artwork. I refuse to wait in the queue. Jane manages a photo with Eric. Her level of delight is such that I feel like the cantankerous Grinch I am. The ominous weather isn’t helping my mood, either, since Jane has announced that her rain gear is the equivalent of a dry cleaning bag.

The ride into Lancaster follows the train track. It is pleasantly flat. Lancaster is an attractive town with a long history. The traditional emblem of the House of Lancaster is the Red Rose. During the late 15th century, the House of Lancaster (Red Rose) fought sporadically with the House of York (White Rose) for control of the English Throne. This martial period is known as the War of the Roses. Red roses are everywhere, indicating regional pride has not diminished. The city looks beautiful from the cycle path across the River Lune. We cross a bridge and move right along.

This is not that kind of the trip: the kind of trip where you stop and see the Roman Baths; wander aimlessly along market streets next to Lancaster Castle; explore Lancaster City Museum then Lancaster Priory Church; and take in the history of the place. This is the kind of trip where you “get there.” You ride with purpose to the evening destination because otherwise, without a tent and in an area where accommodation is totally booked out, you will sleep in a ditch. We ride right by Lancaster. I am thinking, at least it is not raining.

Spoke too soon. Jane pulls out her rain gear. It is several steps above a dry cleaning bag, a relief. Her bike has also held together. Given she has never been on a bike trip, and even though we have only gone a few kilometres, her high spirits are infectious. I thank her mentally for not shooting me this morning and putting me out of my (and her) misery. Things are looking up. It is not pelting down rain but a gentle mist. The ride along the River Lune is a beautiful greenway. The route becomes rolling hills some of which are fun. If you ride down fast and pedal on the downhill, you can make it to the crest of the next hill and do it again – for many iterations. In Hornby we have lunch (in the rain). I am able to pull out a thermos of hot water and make soup, a luxury. We arrive at a crucial waypoint. Because of the shortage of housing, our lodging is far from the official Sustrans route.

The options are: (a) detour left off the prescribed route to get to our beds quicker or (b) continue along the route, detour to the lodging, and next morning backtrack fourteen kilometres. It is 3:30pm. We have managed to cycle forty kilometres. I am exhausted. Time for a sensible decision.

Jane announces she is a “completist.” I am thinking: is that a noun? And, if it is, is it a noun describing a vocation or a mental illness? I share with Jane that if we follow the route precisely we will have twenty more kilometres of riding today. Most of that riding will be over hills, not the gently rolling kind, meaning an 8pm arrival at our lodging. Jane is unfazed by every one of the fifty barriers I describe. A silence ensues. Jane then looks deep into my eyes and sees the Rasputin-like stare of a homicidal maniac. She relents. We take the short cut. This is our first introduction into what a “dale” is. It is a two kilometre straight down precipitous drop and a two kilometre climb up. We push the bikes most of the way. It takes an hour. I am even more exhausted. Even Jane is flagging. We take a treacherous off-piste ride down lorry saturated A65 and swing right into the back streets of town.

Inglewood is laid out in a loop. Our B&B is at the far end. The ride through town shows a thriving country community with a garden centre that, surprisingly, is our B&B. Garden centre by day; B&B by night. We arrive at the witching hour and tramp past flowers and bags of fertiliser to find a welcoming Dad and Daughter who shove all the gardening receipts, seed plants, and bags of potting soil off a table, sit us down, and give us tea. The room is lovely and the shower hot. Starved we run downstreet to an Italian restaurant with six tables and eat the best Italian meal I have had in twenty years, including in Italy. Jane is alive, unaware that imminent death was upon her several times during the day. I am fed. All is right with the world.

Next morning we have a FULL ENGLISH BREAKFAST and head out over fairly hilly terrain including a 14% descent. This means, of course, that first we ride up a big hill with tummies full of bacon, sausages, eggs, orange juice, beans, tomatoes, toast, corn flakes, black pudding, potatoes, and tea. In the rain. This is horrendously uncomfortable. We pass a church I would like to see and remind myself: this is not that kind of trip. This is the kind of trip where you ride full-on every day, sleep, get up, and do it again. You wave at the churches and stately homes as you fly by so you can arrive timely at next lodging.

We institute a routine made possible by the level of tourism in this area: at every village there is a tea shop. I insist that we stop at least twice a day. I have learned that Jane hates the little cups of rice pudding I carry with me because she says rice pudding looks like vomit. Every time she annoys me, I crack one open and describe its gastronomic delights. In Clapham when I say, “Tea Shop, Let’s Stop!” she begins to demure. Speaking slowly, I explain to Jane that it is cold and wet outside. No luck. I whip out a rice pudding. With hurling stomach, Jane runs into the tea shop. Mission accomplished.

The tea shop in Clapham is owned by a woman whose name might well be Prunella Frump. A smile never crosses her face. Outside, we meet a group of bike riders who are on a tour where everything is provided for them including a travelling support van which disgorges, every 1.5 hours, tea and cakes. Why are we not on that tour? We also meet a man who is doing the entire Way of the Roses in two days (on his souped up road bike with a support van). What is the point of that? We are taking ten days and even then we are riding by every place I want to see.





CHAPTER II. Way of the White Roses





From Clapham we take a circuitous route through Austwick onto the Pennine Bridleway and into Settle. Settle is absolutely bustling. Visitors overflow onto the outside seats of pubs, restaurants, and souvenir shops. Settle is the start (or finish) of the Settle – Carlisle rail line, explaining the hordes. The rail line is 117 kilometres and goes through fabulous Yorkshire Dales scenery. This includes the Ribblehead Viaduct, 400 metres long, thirty-two metres high, and as dramatic as the one in Harry Potter. In the 1980’s British Rail scheduled the line for closure. Public hue and cry reversed that decision. The route is now one of the most popular in the UK. I whimper longingly to be on it, but we won’t be seeing that either.

What we see is the road out of Settle and the start of the most difficult part of our trip. The grade is 1:5. If you want to experience that, take a box weighing twenty kilograms and push it over your head 1,000 times. That’s what it feels like. We walk, and we walk. It is a long, long way. I resort to a counting strategy of fifty steps and stop. Every time I get to a rise, another rise looms. Meanwhile, Jane is pushing along behind me, a Classics educated version of the Energiser Bunny. I start to realise something about Jane. She may not be fit. She may have an urban commuter bike. She may not have been on a long cycle trip before. But, she is relentlessly determined and positive. (I am also starting to realise that I think she lied about the fitness thing because we get to the top of these enormous hills where I am ready to collapse, and she marches right by me.) Her prowess is undermining my tender ego. We mount up and ride past yet another waterfall onto the Scosthrop Moor. We are in the Yorkshire Dales National Park.

The upside of these climbs is: there is a downside. This one into Airton is hair-raising, over the River Aire and onto Newfield Hall, tonight’s stop. Newfield Hall is a puzzle. It is an upscale country house, but it offered rooms at a reasonable price. We ride up the manicured drive past some token farm animals to the portico. Not a soul around. Jane and I are absolutely grotty and not stately home material. I lean my bike against the front edifice. A chunk of masonry falls off. I stay with the bikes and use the time to rub the blazing white blemish with dirt, hopefully adding age.

Jane marches into what could be the Addams Family home and rouses out the help, who do not bat an eye at our tawdry state. A competent woman escorts us to the stable area and drying rooms. The bikes get snugged up in their own little shed. I would demand we take off all our wet, nasty clothes and throw them on the drying racks, but we are allowed to defile the stately home and are shown our room in the back of beyond. It is a lovely room. It is stocked with tea and biscuits, a good thing since the only food we have is my rice pudding. I am rethinking toying with Jane since she appears to be in better shape than I am.

Dinner is in the dining room, a large banquet hall where we finally meet the other “guests.” They are walkers, all eighty of them. Newfield Hall caters for walking holidays. It an odd group. I mean, do you really need to pay someone to escort you to walk in the Yorkshire Dales? The answer is: for some people, yes. These people do not necessarily make for scintillating company. I redirect my interest to the food, which is wonderful since I didn’t have to cook it. Even though our gear will smell like eighty pairs of boot feet, it will dry out in the drying rooms. The bed is warm and dry. Feeling somewhat satisfied but out of place, I fall fast asleep.

We retrieve the bikes and push them to the portico to load up. Two of the male guests are outside smoking. Both come over. One waxes eloquent about cycling and cycle trips, the outdoors, life, and the place of women “in it all.” I then learn another thing about Jane. She does not think her place “in it all” is at the bottom. She fixes her Kryptonite gaze on the offender and asks, “And your experience with cycling would be what?” Pegged that right. Well, never really been on a cycle trip. She moves onto asking pointed hiking questions, since Jane has covered more ground than the entire Louis and Clark expedition. I am looking for a leash with the hopes that, if I can get it onto Jane, I can drag her away since she looks like she is going to bite his leg. Leash-less, I wait for her to call him an asshole in Latin. Sadly, from my entertainment perspective, the two guests make a hasty retreat into Newfield Hall. Jane is fuming. I use my energy to move us on. We ride down the hill past the token animals, leaving the unsettling feeling of the place behind.

The high temperature today is 11°C. Any other place I could be would be warmer and less wet. Today is another set of hills and twenty kilometres of continuous “up.” I am elated by the “upside” and “downside” phenomenon since twenty kilometres up means? You guessed it. After hours of grinding up over what is truly spectacular scenery, I am shocked to discover that the downside is so steep as to be unrideable. This section is one of the top ten best hill climbs in the world, if you are riding up the other way. Several years ago, it was part of the Tour de France. Yes, the Tour went through Yorkshire Dales as attested to by the numerous memento yellow cycles hanging on walls and displayed in gardens and town squares. We walk down successive grades of 14%, 16%, and 19%. For a really, really long time. To experience this, take that twenty kilogram box and let it hang from your arms while walking along for two hours. The redeeming factor is that the scenery is broad, open, and majestic. We make it to Pateley Bridge. It is still raining.

Tonight’s destination is Summerbridge. The road out of Pateley Bridge is not majestic. It has lots of traffic which is why the cycle route veers off. The quick way to our accommodation is down B6165, traffic and all. The safe way is the cycle route, a steep route up plus a steep route down into Summerbridge. We look at each other and have unwittingly reached détente. The B6165 it is.

Our B&B is the Flying Dutchman Pub, the history of the name never being disclosed. Nobody in it is remotely Dutch. Everyone is local. If you have watched the BBC series All Creatures Great and Small you will have seen the Yorkshire Dales. You also will have heard a version of Yorkshire dialect that sounds farfetched. It is not. Our pubmates speak as incomprehensively as the TV actors. We may as well be in the Netherlands since I don’t understand Dutch either. Our pubmates do not use declensions of the verb “be.” They say: I be, you be, he be, we be, and they be. They use no articles: “a,” “the” and “an” are missing from speech. Very efficient and very colourful. Our pubmates are also warm and hospitable. They tell local stories, make us laugh, and laugh with us.

This is the night Jane decides she wants to play cribbage. I want to go to bed. We play cribbage. She wins. Four times. My tender ego is throbbing. Today I recognise one of Jane’s “other things”: no matter how hard the day’s ride, she energises at 4pm on the dot. She then proceeds to get more energised as the night wears on. There is not enough rice pudding in the world to control her. Defeated and in a major sulk, I head off to bed. Jane keeps celebrating with the locals for another two hours.

Off again, in the rain. This time to Ripon, a cathedral town. Jane is very excited about getting to Ripon because she is an avid chorister. Her choir has sung services at Ripon. I can’t imagine the glory of singing liturgical music in a cathedral that dates back to the 7th century, am excited for her, and mightily jealous. The short ride out of Summerbridge is as bad as the map indicated. We push. Generally, the riding has gotten more civilised and the pushing only occasional.

We are now in a pattern. Because we are cheap, we eat the FULL ENGLISH BREAKFAST included in the room tariff. Every morning. This sounds enchanting. It is not. It is comparable to having a cannonball in your gut as you try and push your bike up serious hills. We then travel along to the first tea stop. Then we have lunch. Then, perhaps an afternoon tea stop. Then the lodging.

In the meantime what is happening is that I am riding a bit ahead because, mostly, my bike coasts better than Jane’s. It ought to at the price I paid for it. She thinks I am ahead because I am fitter and a better cyclist. I am not about to tell her that it is 95% attributable to wheel bearings. I wait for her at intersections and rises which helps restore my self-esteem.

Then something awful happens. My waits get shorter and shorter. I get to an intersection, have a drink, turn around and say “You’re here – already?” After I say that thirty times Jane says, “I don’t know why you sound so surprised?” Well, let me tell you why I sound so surprised. I am supposed to be an athlete. I am exhausted and doing my best to save my tender ego and YOU, Jane, just keep getting faster, and faster, and faster. I also know when we get to our lodging at 4pm, you are going to turn into the Energiser Bunny, and want to DO THINGS. And I am going to be exhausted and just want to go to bed, a situation which is upsetting me even more. On the way to Ripon we pass a pet shop. I think about stopping in to get a tranquiliser dart to shoot Jane with at 4pm.

Today’s entertainment is Fountains Abbey and the Studley Park water garden, a World Heritage Site. Before we arrive at the entrance, Fountains Hall rears up out of the landscape on our right. A 6th century monument to excess, the Hall has been converted by the National Trust, in part, into two holiday apartments that are gloriously decadent and priced more reasonably than I would have thought. Nonetheless, a price totally outside our budget. We turn the corner and come to the theme park entrance. Cars, coach buses, and people everywhere.

Fountains Abbey was founded by the Cistercians in 1132. In a small hollow next to the River Skell, the Abbey ruins are picturesque with the water gardens making the valley more so. We clamber down a hillside to walk through the Abbey ruins. With a cavernous cellarium for food storage, enough of the Abbey remains to validate that by 1535 this was the richest Cistercian monastery in England. Prime pickings for Henry VIII who dissolved it, then sold it on in 1540. The Abbey was left to decay, with stone being pilfered for local building projects such as Fountains Hall. You would know Fountains Abbey as it regularly shows up as a film location and on tourist brochures. We wander down the River Skell and water gardens, crossing from one side to the other. The magic of the place is still intact, in spite of all the visitors. The tea room is good, too.

True to form, we get to Ripon at 4pm. I scout out our lodgings, pass through the bar and think worried thoughts. It is seedy and run down. I meet Jane out back at our room. She went through the same bar. Jane comments on what a nice place this is. Maybe it is the 4pm metabolic surge she is going through. I want to barricade the door to our room for safety. We have no time for conversation. Jane runs off to Ripon Cathedral. Then she comes back and tells me the evening service time and asks if I want to go. She is so excited it would be inhuman to deny her. However, I can’t organise to get there for the start of the service so she runs off again. Mind you, the church is not around the corner.

By way of explanation, Jane power walks. Jane walks faster than I ride a bike. She has been into town (twice) in a half hour, and I am trying not to fall face down on my bed. I get organised and go to the cathedral, lovely indeed. We sit through a church service that, sadly, is not sung but mystical nonetheless. I find it hard not to be affected by the antiquity of the place. I do not remember much else about the rest of the evening except that cribbage was mentioned once again and that I regretted not stopping for that tranquiliser dart.

Off again, in the rain. The temperature will peak at 15°C. I am wearing every piece of winter gear I have – all at the same time. I am glad I did not bring crampons because it would have snowed. I am sick of bitching about the rain. I bet you are sick of listening to my bitching. I have found that the issue is not the wet and cold. It is the grey depressingness of it. My mental health cycles wildly with the grey (depressed) and sunny (euphoric). The solution is: put the yellow lenses in my sun glasses. If you put in the yellow lenses, the world looks brighter, sometimes sunnier, and always greener. My life is changed, and I am less likely to kill Jane. All good.

We are now off the Dales which is sad. They are a landscape like no other. Challenging cycling is rewarded by spectacular views. These new lowlands are not so bad, either. The cycling is easier, and we have finally not had to push the bikes.

Headed to York, we do a ride through a wonderful valley called a wold (formed by glacial retreat) that is a steady up for twelve kilometres, but a gradual grade. I ride the whole way. This time I am rewarded by an equal twelve kilometre easy downhill ride. As I coast to the bottom to wait for Jane I discover…she is already there.

The ride into York brings home how special the Yorkshire Dales are. Founded by the Romans in 71AD, York is a major metropolitan area. Its population is over 150,000. The city, just because it is a city, presents a sharp, and unpleasant, dichotomy to the World Heritage Site and Area of Outstanding National Beauty from whence we have come. The cycle way into York is traffic free and through a series of fields and footpaths. These are littered with rubbish. The road noise from the adjacent heavy traffic further degrades the experience. We find ourselves on the north banks of the River Ouse, in the midst of an urban environment, needing to get to the other side.

The challenge is stairs. Sustrans cycle routes make trade-offs: is it better to make these people use stairs and stay safe or shall we route them onto the flat main road where they are likely to be killed? The issue with our bikes is they are loaded up. Steep stairs mean unloading. Unless you are small, cute, and distressed. Jane manages to look waif-like. An athletic young man materialises, picks up her bike, throws it on his shoulder, and carries it all the way down to the bottom. Moose-like me is left to fend for myself. We cross the river on a traffic free bridge. Jane manages to perform the same prestidigitation on the other side where another athletic young man materialises, carrying her bike to the top and leaving me in her wake.

We are starting to work more as a team. When large things need to be lugged somewhere, I am the designee. When intellectual power is needed, or an effervescent personality to persuade someone to give us what we want, that is Jane. We have also discovered that, thank God, I do have one valuable talent aside from shoving bikes onto trains. I can read maps. Standing on the south bank of the River Ouse, hoping that the rowing shells passing by never tip their occupants in because the high concrete banks will prevent their ever getting out, we check the Sustrans map. Our green cycle path looks intertwined with a spaghetti of pedestrian ways, roads, and obstacles. In an effort to find some semblance of dignity, I tell Jane: “I’ve got this.”

She is not eager to let the reins go but has no choice. Even if the map were written in Latin, she wouldn’t be able to get us where we need to go. We travel along a pathway. I say, “Go Right.” We find ourselves in the postal depot section of the York Train Station. Undeterred, I say, “Go Left.” We ride another 300 metres and are at the side entrance to the York Train Station platform. Jane is sceptical about what is happening here. I am not about to let my one chance at glory disappear, but I am sceptical too. People are looking at us like we are totally lost which, I think, we are. We get onto the platform of York Train Station and dismount, because you can’t ride here, and we walk for what seems forever to the far end of the platform. Down the steps to another parking lot, to the far side of which I lead us.

I am ready to cry, my one moment of glory shattered. At the end of the parking lot Jane yells, “Look. A Sustrans sign.” Jane then declares that my performance has been a “Tour de Force.” (Apparently, Jane also speaks French). The sun comes out and shines just on us, like the Sword in the Stone, and I feel. Well, I feel really special.

I lead us to our lodging. Jane browbeats the owner. Off the bikes and walking, York is more inviting. We head towards York Minster, a magnificent cathedral at which Jane has not yet sung. The anguished yearning in her voice over that missing life event is poignant. I try not to get annoyed even though 4pm is fast upon us, and I know what my life is going to look like for the next few hours. We find real coffee, of which there has been none for days. We walk the walls of the City. Shops are festooned with White Roses. We get to York Minster in time for the Evensong. Jane elbows our way to seats adjacent to the choir stalls, soon filled with a boy choir. Their singing is transportive, and I find peace.

That is, until the rattling of the adjacent choir boy turns into a contortionist act where carving tools clatter from his choir robe sleeve. He proceeds to deface the centuries old wood on the choir stall. I am trying to decide whether I should smack him one or just let the choir stalls get a 21st century dose of vandalism. He carves away mightily, interrupted by a song here and there. Thankfully the service comes to an end. I am ready to find whomever to mention that they might want to look into this. Before I have the chance, a woman comes over and looks at his handiwork. Within my hearing, she has a conversation with the Deacon, offhandedly mentioning that this boy “has carved before.” Both seem interested but not appalled, as I am. We have a young boy aged 7 - 13 who is in a lifestyle that may have helped him find this woodcraft hobby. Child choristers do not have easy lives. They have two full times jobs: school and choir. Add to that just being a child. These kids certainly attend more church services than most of us, and I know how much I like those. I am glad I didn’t smack him one. He deserves to make his mark.

The next morning we ride through York on another spaghetti route. The first bit is through “The Shambles,” a medieval street near the Minster. With the overhanging timber buildings, it feels like the 15th century. My prowess in route finding has diminished, the cholesterol from the FULL ENGLISH BREAKFAST clogging every artery in my brain. Jane, however, has been transformed. She now trusts in my abilities to do something useful. Even though we go astray, she brushes it off.

We link up with the cycle path east and head to Pocklington. The roads are pancake flat, through cultivated fields with the occasional hedge. Pocklington is an upscale bedroom community with any number of shops and entertainments. Ours is Fullers Bakery with its scrumptious soup. At lunch we scour the maps and find a short route to Driffield that will cut off many kilometres from the Sustrans route. However, quite often the Sustrans routes take you to places of great interest that are off the tourist grid. With our new found partnership, we opt for the longer route and head to Millington and what could be a horrendous up and down ride. The contour lines are so close together it is hard to tell.

What we find is kilometres of untouched landscape, chalk hills on both sides, and a one track road at the bottom. We are in the Central Wolds where the valleys have been carved by glaciers. Since the chalk drains well, surface water is quite scarce. The topography is not as flat as it appears and the combination of water availability and topography have led to “upside-down” farming where the livestock grazes the valleys and the hills are used for crops. We climb gradually, coast down the other side, and find our beds at the Yorkshire Wold Cooking School which serves no dinner. We have more soup.

Our terminus is Bridlington, reached after a short morning’s ride. Bridlington is another seaside resort and everything that Morecambe is not. It is charming, with a sand beach that goes on forever, white cliffs, and pleasant seaside shops. We have taken our time getting here because it will be the end of our trip together. I will go on to Scotland. Jane and Sue will head to a friend’s farm. We ride along the North Sands. Beach toys are for sale but only two children are in the water. They are blue. It’s the North Sea and cold. We stop along the seawall and park our bikes.

Jane ferrets into her bags and pulls out her complex, lustrous, colourful rock. She urges me on, and I am ashamed I was such a curmudgeon in Morecambe. For one instant she thinks I have chucked my rock shard along the way, but I reassure here that while I was colossally ungracious about this whole rock thing in Morecambe, I have become teary eyed at the prospect of our “chuck the rocks in the water” ceremony. Jane does shed a tear as we walk down to the water. I do, too. It’s been a long trip. Nobody died. It was enriching and instructive. Jane tosses her rock high into the waves. I take my miniscule shard and toss it. The wind blows it back right onto the beach. Easily seen on the white sand, I fetch it. We wait for a lull in the wind. Of it goes. Hopefully it will not breed and create mudflats here.

Jane is already planning next year’s trip. I am wondering how I will survive it. She ran me into the ground, although I will never let her know it. Sue has brought the rest of my camping gear. I spread it all over my room only to return, after dinner, and discover that our OCD host had stacked it into neat piles. Admittedly, my room looked like a bomb had hit with all 500 items spread everywhere. I restore chaos and pack. I have visited the Bridlington Post Office to find my advance food box arrived. I manage to get everything jammed into the panniers. My gear now weighs twenty-six kilograms plus the bike weight. The bike has the manoeuvrability of a swamped boat. This is worrying, as is the prospect of how I am going to get all this onto a train by myself.

Be careful what you wish for, you just might get it. I am now alone. I remember how I thought it would be better alone. I now know I will miss Jane. I am terrified of being a solo traveller. I am wildly excited about the adventure. I am in a foreign country, thankfully first world, headed to Scotland which, the English will tell you, is third world. It is all so unknown. I hate the unknown. What was I thinking?





CHAPTER III. Dumfries





I give big hugs to Jane and Sue. Two hundred metres of riding brings a new anticipation. I am going on a train ride to Dumfries, Scotland! British Rail says, “You can’t get there direct from here!” The British Rail system is wonderful, although the routing can be circuitous. My route goes south to York. I get off the train in York and find myself on the very same platform of “Tour de Force” fame. A bit lonely, I think of Jane and how special she made me feel. Maybe things will go OK. I hop onto the next train north up to Newcastle upon Tyne. Then west to Carlisle along the route of Hadrian’s Wall, visible occasionally on the hillside. Carlisle’s train station is a pure Victorian confection in neo-Tudor style. In two hours, a regional train takes me north to Dumfries.

The rail journey involves many platform changes with the ridiculously heavy bike and panniers. Oddly enough, it all goes well. I find the further north I travel, the nicer everyone becomes. People help me, unasked, with my bike and gear. Conductors are cheerful. When I arrive in Dumfries, a woman waiting for her ride home to Kirkcudbright asks if I am headed that way. When she says Kirkcudbright in her Scottish accent, I cannot understand her. We finally take out a map to figure out if my route intersects with that mouthful of a town. It does. She tries to teach me to say, correctly, “Kirkcudbright” (kir-COO-bree). We both crack up at my ineptitude. She suggests coffee when I arrive in Kirkcudbright and offers a bed for the night. I have been at my journey’s start for twenty minutes and scored a bed and a new friend. I forgot why I liked Scotland so much: the Scots.

What I do not like is the relentless wind and my major upper respiratory infection. The Airbnb hostess considers cancelling my reservation, afraid her house will be declared ground zero for the plague. The third floor room is a tiny cell with a comfy skylight. My nose is so runny dehydration is a risk. This means drinking lots of liquids and then bathroom trips every hour. I go through an entire box of tissues in one day and can’t muster the energy to see the joys of Dumfries. Day two I make an effort because my panniers are now jam packed with stinky clothes.

Culture shock. Scotland does not have laundromats. The story is that laundromats turned into drug dens and were closed by government fiat. The only option, other than going door to door and looking woeful, is to use a drop off laundry service which takes at least a day. Thus, laundry stops will need careful planning. (I hear some of you thinking: “Just wash it in the sink each night.” A word about cycle touring, polyester and fleece. The sink doesn’t cut it, unless you use drain cleaner as a pre-soak.) I trundle crosstown with a bag emitting grey fumes and make it to the laundry just before exhaustion sets in. Next door is a butty shop where I introduce myself to the joys of a bacon butty, a white bread roll spread thick with butter and stuffed with bacon, fat on. The fat and salt content of one bacon butty is one month’s nutritional equivalent. It is my new comfort food. I munch one and read a trash magazine about what all the Royals are up to, the Scots thinking that the English have many strange sexual proclivities. I munch a second butty, read on, and tend to agree.

Thoughts of clean clothes and the World Health Organisation downgrading my plague risk from Grade 3 to Grade 1 brings a brighter day. My clean clothes will be ready today. My hostess is a phantom, meaning I can rattle around the apartment without having to make small talk. I plot out a return trip to the laundry in such a way that it involves real coffee, a visit to the bookstore, a wander around town, a movie, another bacon butty, and a pleasurable stroll home. I do all these things and on the way home decide to take in some of the local colour.

Dumfries’ big claim to fame is that Robert Burns moved to Dumfriesshire in 1788 and Dumfries proper in 1791, dying here in 1796. Alongside the River Nith and its waterfall is one of many tributes to Burns, the Robert Burns Centre Film Theatre. Crossing the pedestrian suspension bridge over the Nith to the Centre, I never can find the theatre, as so often happens with some of these government run businesses. Awful signage. The privately run café in the same building is well marked, though, and a good choice. The remainder of the afternoon involves laying out maps and planning the next days.

I decided to start this Scottish trip in Dumfries because the cycling from Carlisle to Dumfries did not look very interesting: big towns, busy roads, and not what I am looking for. Dumfries has been a perfect launching point. Small, interesting, friendly, and Scottish (as opposed to Tourist). Next stop, Castle Douglas.

The first challenge is getting out of town. The people of Dumfries have embraced cycle routes. There are so many different cycle routes and cycle organisations competing for pre-eminence that the signage is a hash. One post has twelve signs. It is impossible to stay on plan without a map. On two occasions I find signs to the same place pointing in opposite directions. Blue signs, green signs, yellow signs. I ride in as westerly direction as I can, no mean feat with all the construction along the cycleway, ignore the signage, and use the sun to stay oriented. The memories of my trip thirty-five years ago are flooding back because even in this short distance, the south-west prevailing wind is strong. I will never forget that wind. It is relentless. I knew this part of the trip would be into a headwind. However, there is “knowing” and “experiencing.” Having to pedal downhill is discouraging.

I end up on an Old Military Road. It follows the ridge top so the military would have a good vantage point, not because it is engineered for the comfort of the troops. The road is straight but hilly. I am less ill having progressed from blowing my nose every five metres to every twenty. This is the first ride with a full complement of gear. It is gutting. Unlike the Dales where the wind was at our backs, this wind is blowing in my face. I am pedalling both the ups and the downs. One terrifying gust blows me clear to the other side of the road.

Finally a crossroads. I stop in Haugh of Urr (“haugh” meaning level piece of ground beside a stream, i.e. the River Urr). This is an unexciting crossroads until I spy the Laurie Arms Hotel. Desperate for a break, I throw my bike against the outside wall of the pub, pray for the front door to be open, stumble in, and find a seat underneath the heater. The pub is empty. The décor is not promising. The publican appears ten minutes later. I start with tea which turns me back into a human. I ask about lunch which, yes, they do serve. The menu is intriguing and down home Scottish.

Unexpectedly, the food is fantastic. I have fish cakes on creamed leeks. The owner sits down and chats about running a rural pub, the challenges of making an economic go of it, local personalities, and local politics. The local personalities are particularly entertaining stories involving too much whiskey and bad behaviour. This is nice. It is especially nice because I thought I was going to die in her pub, after all of a big fat fifteen kilometres that took three hours to ride. Since it is only noonish, even I can’t justify setting up a tent in her back field, which is offered. Whimpering, I propel myself out the front door, onto my bike, and down the road. Fish cakes and creamed leeks are evidently a power food because everything seems easier. Rejuvenated, the annoying whimpering stops. I roar into Castle Douglas.

There is no “Castle Douglas,” at least no castle by that name. The name inspired me to anticipate an old, venerated town and the home of the Clan Douglas. Not even close. Threave Castle, a ruin and many kilometres west of here, was the actual home of the Earls of Douglas and Lords of Galloway until 1455. It was then abandoned and now derelict. In contrast, Castle Douglas is a planned town. Built by William Douglas and founded in 1792, it is laid out on a tidy grid pattern. It has been a busy market town ever since. William Gordon then built Threave House in 1873, bringing a touch of the aristocratic closer to the centre of town. Castle Douglas is a designated “Food Town.” I know this because it is on leaflets, banners, signs, and any manner of tourist communication. I do not know what a “Food Town” is. It can’t be bad. I am going to find out.

First, a place to sleep. At the south edge of the central business district, the council runs a campsite on Carlingwark Loch. When I appear at registration and ask where I can put my tent, the warden unfolds his arms wide in an easterly direction where there are fields, and trees, and flat dry ground everywhere. I give him a puzzled look. He says, “Anywhere you like.” I pick a site under a giant tree, so I can lean my bike against it, and with a clear view of the lake. That night a mad adventurer on a penny farthing, riding from Land’s End in Cornwall to John O’Groats in Caithness as a fundraiser, takes up residence at the tree next door. I no longer feel odd man out. At least I am riding a normal bike. My tent goes up. I blow up the air mattress and fluff up the sleeping bag. I store panniers alongside the tent and make a nest inside. Dinner is nibblies because I am that tired. I am also terrified of lighting the stove. I can guarantee that will be an “event.”

Next morning I investigate downtown, finding real coffee to start the day. Castle Douglas is in Dumfries and Galloway but takes the Galloway part far more seriously. You will know Galloway from the Belted Galloway cows, the black cows with the white belts around their middles. You cannot look at a Belted Galloway and not think “freak of nature.” They do well in boggy terrain and wet, cold weather. While I promised I would not whinge any more about the weather, my total trip so far has seen four full days of sunshine and two of those were in Yorkshire. Perfect for these ubiquitous cows with their sweet faces and inquisitive natures. Here, they make up the “red meat” part of the diet.

While there are wonderful foods in this area, almost none are good for you. Aside from the red meat, haggis is everywhere in Galloway: haggis breakfast sandwich, haggis toasty, haggis with lunch, and on one evening menu, haggis and tatties as a starter with two versions of mains stuffed with haggis. My stomach refuses to allow haggis experimentation, yet. Sheep’s stomach stuffed with oatmeal and sheep offal. Yum! Black pudding, made of pig’s blood and oatmeal and looking just like a giant blood clot, is another treat. It is on every breakfast menu, and also a step too far for me. Yet. I will get there. Galloway has only two vegetables: potatoes and medley. Medley means – carrots, peas, broccoli. Or, if you are in a fancy restaurant, carrots, peas, broccoli, and two string beans. Soups are everywhere, exclusively the stick to your ribs kinds like potatoes and leek, ham and pea, or barley and something. Mind you, it is July. It is summer. This is all winter food which should have clued me in. As one woman laughed at me: “Nobody comes to Scotland for the sun!” Well, I did. What about all those Scottish Tourist Board photos of beaches in the sunlight, wildlife in the sunlight, mountains in the sunlight? The Scottish Tourist Board should be arrested for false advertising.

I am still struggling with “the disease” and opt for a short adventure, riding the path around Carlingwark Loch. The campground warden confirms it is a nice walk. I ask if it is cyclable, since I want to continue on to stately Threave House afterwards. He indicates a “few” gates that “should be no problem for yee.” “Few” is manspeak for seventeen. We are talking serious cattle gates all of which are locked. After the first seven, which involves picking my bike up over my head (thankfully unloaded) and then carefully (HA!) dropping it on the other side, I realise I am in trouble. It is like the Grand National. Fifty metres walk/over gate/fifty metres walk/over gate. Remembering Jane’s enthusiasm, I recall I was going to work on my upper body strength anyway. Time to be positive. Each gate gets higher and higher to increase the challenge. At the last gate which is above head height, two women hiking in the opposite direction stop, watch me get the bike over, and then break into applause. I WIN! Very gratifying.

Threave House isn’t too shabby either, even though the house is closed and only the gardens are open. The tea room’s scones fall into the “yummy food that is not good for you” category. The gardens are fun, with paths, sculpture, and water features supporting a family of ducks. Back into town to the pharmacy where I ask for drugs. I have had enough of this runny nose and cough. The nice lady at the counter tells me there are no drugs for a nose that runs constantly in voluminous quantities. I crawl over the counter to point out the Sudafed. I am pushed back off the counter, my hand is slapped, and am told “NO DRUGS FOR YOU.” This is not America where they would have sold me a sackful. I buy another giant box of tissues and stomp out.

I am down to only eighteen coughing attacks and half a box of tissues a day. The latter because I am stealing toilet tissue and napkins wherever I alight because I don’t have room on the bike for a big tissue box. Kirkcudbright is not too far away. Time to hack and wheeze my way over there. Maybe they will have a pharmacist who will sell me drugs. The sun comes out for the morning. It is a beautiful ride. Nothing too challenging with unbelievable vistas, forests, rolling hills, and a mad dash downhill into Kirkcudbright. Everyone here is very invested in the community. To the people of Kirkcudbright, this is the centre of the universe.

The realisation is dawning that this view of centrality is not misplaced. The distance between towns is getting longer, and longer. The distance to a major urban centre is considerable, especially with the curvy, narrow roads. That Kirkcudbright with its 3,300 residents seems like a major metropolis is a worry. Where I am going will be even more remote. Time to stock up again on food. Not before finding the town campground, though, which is on a nice rise.

The warden directs me to a spot in the middle of the roundabout at the campground entrance. I look at her and say, “Are you kidding?” No, she is not. She thinks she has done me a favour because the spot is close to the toilet, which is no surprise because of the methane miasma flowing out the toilet door. Thanks to Jane’s tutelage (you have such a lovely campsite; I love the green of the grass over there; you have kept it so nice and tidy over there; people will not have to trip over me on the way to the toilet), I persuade the warden that a spot at the far end of the field is acceptable. I diplomatically do not mention that if I light my stove next to that toilet, Kirkcudbright will evaporate from the face of the earth.

Last night, the council mowed my tent site. The result is serious wet clods of grass on my shoes. I leave grass everywhere throughout Kirkcudbright, my own personal version of the Green Man. I contact my Dumfries train station friend and make arrangements for lunch at her apartment. To fill in the morning, I stop by the grocery store. Grocery shops, too, are getting smaller with less variety. Feeling better I decide not to do battle with the local pharmacist but, instead, use that time to organise a laundry run. Even a small town this size has a laundry service. They can do mine before 5pm, same day. Probably don’t want to have it hanging around in the laundry stinking up the clean stuff.

Kirkcudbright has a Tolbooth, housing a lively art gallery. Tolbooths were the main municipal building of a Scottish burgh, the burghs created in the 12th century. A burgh had the right to hold markets and levy customs and tolls, with the tolbooths created to collect them. Tolbooths also housed criminals awaiting trial, debtors, and served as places for public punishment with whipping posts and stocks. Oddly, the feeling of the tolbooth is depressing, even filled with the art. It’s silly to say that the gloom of its past hangs over it, but it does. I move on to Broughton House which is much more uplifting. It is the house and contents of Edward Atkinson Hormel, Scottish artist, about whom I knew nothing and am now mightily impressed. He associated himself with the Glasgow Boys, painted in the late 19th and early 20th century with many of his pieces depicting children in colourful natural landscapes. Upon his death, the house and library were donated to the citizens of Kirkcudbright. It is an energising, interesting place with a lovely garden overlooking the harbour. A nice morning, well spent. Now time to go meet my new friend.

Unbeknownst to me aforehand, she is a member of the clergy. I am an atheist. This is going to be interesting. It is, more so than I could have ever imagined. She is in transition from a situation of which I was clueless – church politics. It doesn’t take much to realise that an institution the size of the church would have a political aspect. I naively thought that all these “I Love God” people would treat each other mercifully and kindly. Well, they treat each other like people do. Sometimes, not mercifully and kindly. Perhaps not downright maliciously, but the end effect is soul destroying just the same. My eyes are opened on this one. I did not know this could happen. To call her a victim, though, would be very misplaced. She is highly intelligent and has pondered (and prayed, I presume) on the various options available to her and made decisions throughout that were informed and according to her beliefs. My unbeliever life seems horrendously cavalier by comparison.

Our conversation moves on to the purpose of religion, how belief plays or does not play a part in one's life, and the balance between belief, morality, actions, and being human. It is the most profound conversation I have had since I took a university course on Teilhard de Chardon forty-five years ago. Our exploration pries open a part of my brain that I did not know existed anymore. Lunch was good, too. So a new friend, an enlightening experience, hopefully for both of us, and much credit to her for being so brave as to invite me. We could have both been axe murderers.

Next day it is off to Gatehouse of Fleet, the actual name of the town on the Waters of Fleet. I am learning not to hope for sunlight too much. When it comes out, so do the bugs. Early on I was unaware of this because the sun was ephemeral. Today the sun is blazing, the bugs come out, and I inhale a fly. When I say inhale, I don’t mean breath it in and cough it out. I mean working hard on the bike, breathing heavily, and sucking the damn bug into the bottom right lobe of my lung. I can feel that fly flapping around down by my liver. I cough. Nothing happens except more buzzing. You know what happens if you cough too hard in a panicked attack to get rid of lung detritus? Your stomach joins in and other things come up. To avoid this I decide to move on, buzzing away. Thank heavens I am sick and coughing anyway.

Two days later at cough number 45,112, the fly makes its reappearance. I take “Go to the Emergency Room to have fly removed” off my list of To Do’s.

It is overcast as I leave Kirkcudbright. “Nice weather” in Scotland means only mist and overcast. The Scots call this a “soft day.” It is good riding weather. Today’s trip starts south along the River Dee soon overlooking Milton Sands, a Morecambe-like tidal area. The difference is the sand flats appear more welcoming until the “Beware of Quicksand” sign pops up. I pass the Devil’s Thrashing Floor with its colourful name but undistinguishable features. The route swings west through farmland overlooking a rocky coast, the dramatic coastline becoming more visible at Barlocco, Ardwell, and Murray’s Isles. The latter are owned by the National Trust for Scotland and contain a significant Cormorant nesting/study area. The road is narrow with fields on both sides. Every time I stop, Galloway cows run up to investigate. A tractor cutting hay zooms back and forth. We wait for each other depending on who can find the first nook in the narrow rock wall lined road. No cars appear. The hill climbs steadily to far ranging vistas over beautiful countryside, with surprises as well.

I came to the UK a long time ago (15+ years ago), and there was no organised cycle network. You bought Ordnance Survey (OS) maps and figured out your own routing. Sometimes it was great. Sometimes you ended up on a B Road with more traffic than the M1. Sustrans has done an unbelievable job of providing safe alternatives in just fifteen years, expanding its network into Scotland where I am now on National Route 7.

Not as well publicised is that Sustrans supports art along its routes. Toodling along on your bike, you may find artwork. Big art. Little art. Sculpture. Painting. Writing. Poetry. Almost always, unexpected art. Remember that pilot trip I made in the UK before launching myself on this one? I was on a traffic free Sustrans route outside of Wells, a cathedral town. The dirt track went under a bridge, and I chanced to look up. Hanging from the rafters was a two metre wheel-like sculpture of elegant circling angels. I will never forget it. Today, I am riding along looking at the scenery, turn a corner, and laugh out loud. Those Galloway cows? Well, someone has painted this quaint country bridge, one end to the other, with belts of black and white that look just like the Oreo cows. It is fanciful, hilarious and really brightens up the soft day.





CHAPTER IV. Galloway





Since most towns are located along rivers, the last part of every day is a quick descent to civilisation. The ride into Gatehouse of Fleet is through a wooded park, avoiding another hellish Old Military Road. The first building is the Masonic Arms where the proprietor is on a tall ladder, standing on one leg while fiddling with an upstairs window. He spies me and comes down before the Emergency Room is involved. I am unclear that this even is a pub. It might be the Scottish equivalent of God-botherers. He offers tea and provides a menu, a dead giveaway I am not the target of religious recruitment. He proudly tells me the Masons built the pub in 1802, but it isn’t a Masonic house anymore. The Masonic Device hangs over the door in homage to history.

He and I appear to be the only people on the planet. I see no other humans. I see no traffic. This is a crossroads, and I am on a major route. Is this the Twilight Zone? Well, sort of. The town has every service one would need, including a Spar grocery store where in honour of Jane, I restock my rice pudding. Newly painted, white, two-story, attached stone houses run 500 metres down the main street, and I see absolutely no one except two customers in the Spar. Gatehouse of Fleet is a major commercial hub. The problem is, my perception. Things here are on a smaller scale. Complete, but smaller. The spaces between towns are growing. The towns themselves are smaller. I am not quite sure how I feel about all this. Without Jane, it is starting to feel…awfully lonely.

Tonight I am at the local campground. The campsite is privately run and not inviting. The owner takes my money and directs me to a grass rectangle surrounded by static caravans. Privacy zilch. The site costs twice as much as the council run ones and has so many rules I know I won’t be staying more than a night. I also know I will not be using my stove on the manicured grass lawn.

In Castle Douglas, I managed to fire up the stove once. My tent site was near a playground. When I lit the match, a two metre flame shot up preceded by a ball of flame the size of Halley’s Comet. I went through half a can of fuel and illuminated the entire playground before realising the priming jet was still on. Meanwhile, at the playground, all activity stopped. With the flame finally under control and a handful of scorched leaves on the overhanging tree boughs, I cooked my dinner with eight eager little faces waiting for the next explosion and six terrified parents holding fingers poised over their mobile speed dial for “Fire Brigade.”

Back at tonight’s campground, I am perplexed by the bathtubs on offer. Would you take a bath in a tub used by a monumentally transient population? The bathrooms are clean, though, and the shower hot. I gussy up, walk back to “The Mill on the Fleet,” enjoy its historical exhibit, and visit the old cotton spinning mill site. A nice lady in the café fills up my thermos with hot water for free, taking pity when she knows I am headed back to the campground in the rain. Thanks to her, I avoid fifty pairs of inquisitive eyes and enjoy a lovely hot soup dinner in my tent.

Off to Newton Stewart. It is today that I realise how sick I was, because I am not sick anymore. Pharmacists rejoice! While I start the ride on a soft day, it soon clears up. The first part of the ride is on an “Old Military Road,” straight and flat. The right hand turnoff follows the Waters of the Fleet north past Rusko Castle, a 15th century three story grey stone keep with a cyclical history of ruin and restoration, presently occupied. I can’t imagine it is homey. It is certainly intriguing.

Today’s inevitable ascent that starts each morning is a long gradual slope with spectacular landscape overlooking escarpments and river valleys. The visibility is endless. From my vantage point I can see the Cliffs of Dromore as well as the Cairnsmore of Fleet, a 711m mountain. Behind them is Galloway Forest Park. The Park is 373 square miles of boundless nature, including 250 lochs. It is a Dark Skies Park, a designation awarded by the International Dark-Sky Association to land possessing exceptional starry nights and nocturnal environment. The park is a mecca for cyclists, primarily mountain bikers. Its trails are not conducive to my weight laden touring bike. I take the main road in and visit the welcome centre, a refreshing and informative respite.

It is here that I wrestle with a nagging problem. I estimate that over 95% of the cyclists using the Sustrans routes are not long distance tourers and about 75% of the National Route users are men on racing bikes. To them, hills are part of the package and a desirable manly challenge. To me, hills are a considerable problem. Two Sustrans Routes leave Newton Stewart. My planned route is north on forest tracks through Glentrool Forest. Some of the forest tracks look very navigable on my bike. Others are questionable. The Nick of the Balloch is a potential nightmare.

The Nick is a narrow road between Rowantree Hill (559m) and Craiganheather (443m), rising to 389 metres from Newton Stewart (20m). The screamer is that the far side of the Nick is a precipitous descent to 146m, followed by a second climb, this time to 337 metres. Next, another screaming descent to Crosshill (45m). Aside from the problem of getting up those mountains will be the even more difficult problem of getting down. Riding my brakes for ten kilometres downhill with all that weight is a safety issue. It means a lot of walking. I leave the Galloway Forest Park Visitor Centre and head to Newton Stewart. The two 20% grades into Newton Stewart are instructive. I can barely control my bike, walking, with both brakes on. The ride into town on a rehabilitated rail overlooking the tidal flats of the River Cree provides a pleasant counterpoint.

Newton Stewart is scary. It is located on a major east west route that terminates in Stranraer, near the ferry to Northern Ireland. Newton Stewart also has a major road headed north towards Glasgow. The town has all the charm of a major highway intersection. My plan is to spend a couple of days in Newton Stewart, sussing out which route to take and having a break. When I arrive, it is just not a place that feels welcoming. Every small town has a Tourist Information area. Newton Stewart, which is an order of magnitude bigger than any town I have recently travelled through, has one, too. It is in a ratty little building with no one inside. At the bottom of the door, a tiny handwritten note says it is permanently closed. This is clearly a town that people pass through but do not stop. I find the pub where I am staying and take the bike out back amidst the car ruins and scrap metal. The owner is friendly. The room is clean. When I pull up the window blinds I discover my one window is looking at a brick wall less than a metre away. If I opened the window I could touch that wall. It fills the entire view. I feel imprisoned.

The beer downstairs helps as do the lively locals. Nonetheless, I spend the night scoping out a route out of Dodge. Self-preservation prevails. I abandon the scenic north route that would be no fun at all. Instead, I plan to head south and west to Stranraer. From there I can catch a train to the stop nearest Ardrossan, embarkation point for the ferry to Arran. I’ll miss the mountains, the Nick, and the industrialised coast. It will take two days to get to Stranraer. It looks like a safe route with its own enchantments.

Although my pub hosts were very warm and charming, I can’t get out of Newton Stuart fast enough. It must be the A714 traffic roaring by. Sustrans provides Route 73 heading south then west. The first bit is a traffic free cycleway alongside the A714, with relentless traffic an arm’s length away. Then a left hand turn at St Ninian’s Well. St Ninian is a revered saint in this area and 8th century missionary to the Pictish people. He wandered throughout Galloway where St Ninian wells, caves, chapels, churches, bridges, cottages, and tourist souvenirs abound. The route follows the River Cree to Wigtown and the Wigtown Sands tidal area, birds everywhere.

Wigtown is “Scotland’s National Book Town.” This is a real oddity since Wigtown’s population is 870. Wigtown House: Nursery, Bistro, Books appears. Over a cup of tea and very nice scones, I review my map for today’s ride, making a mental plan for my way out of Wigtown. The Hotel has a panoramic view of the coast, looking wet and wild. True to advertising, I visit three more bookstores and for £1, as opposed to £8.99, buy an old version of an OS map I need. Wigtown’s multi-coloured, tidy, perky buildings surround a central monument and green.

These towns are like oases. Instead of palm trees and mud huts, you get beautiful stone buildings and stolid architecture. Instead of sand, you get countryside, seaside, and rain.

Today I manage sixty-eight kilometres. This is not by design. I cleverly plot my way out of Wigtown and at the first intersection, know exactly where I am headed. I am sad, too. Five kilometres northwest of Wigtown is a particularly well preserved Stone Circle. However, because roads are few and far between, it would mean a fifteen kilometre diversion. I will need to miss it. Off to Bladnoch and a drive by my first distillery. Then on to Kirwaugh Moor and Hillhead. I ride. And ride. Where is Bladnoch? Up pops a sign: “Stone Circle 100m ahead.” The grey sky and realisation that I have gone off-piste is depressing. The rain starts again.

If I were with Jane, she would have been effervescent at this turn of events. I am distraught because I still feel lonely, and I am frustrated by having no one to take all my negative feelings out on. Time to pull up the bootstraps and get used to the new normal. I had really wanted to see this stone circle, hadn’t I? The Zen Bus has taken me on this side trip. I am not so sure I should be upset. Putting on my Big Girl pants, I stop, hop off the bike, and walk towards my first Scottish Stone Circle. Just as I arrive at the outer ring, the clouds part. The sun shines with a bolt of light coming right into the Stone Circle. Maybe I am a Druid. It is magical. I bask in the message that maybe “boot pulling up” and “Big Girl pants” are being cosmically rewarded. Much more happily, the clouds back in place, I ride the rest of the diversion route along bubbling burns and tree lined glades. In a fit of constructive thinking, Plan B is: if I run out of steam, I can just wild camp.

A word about wild camping. Scotland has a Right to Roam law that says you may walk and camp on land, anywhere, provided you arrive under your own steam (foot/cycle) and are respectful. Excluded are front lawns, gardens, and hazardous waste sites. This Right to Roam law is not always embraced by landowners. The Scottish Parliament has solved this by establishing trespassing laws. The trespassing laws are directed not at you, camping in the field, but at the landowner, trying to tell you to get out. You get done for trespass in Scotland if you prevent someone from exercising their Roaming Rights. Scotland has some of the best access rights in the world, with educational literature that speaks about “respect,” “appropriate,” and people being “responsible” for behaving as grown-ups should.

This sounds enchanting. I can just pitch my tent anytime I get tired. However, the reality in Galloway is that every field has cows with a bull. Where there are patches of ground without livestock, there is bracken, gorse, thistles, and ferns two metres high. Places that appear to have forests have giant lumps with water in between the trees. The remaining land is, as the weather people now tell us, “saturated.” My one hope is an estate owned by a Russian businessman with enormous gilded gates and signs along its boundaries saying “No Trespassing.” I decide not to test my Roaming Rights there. I keep riding because the map says there is a commercial campground near a beach. The sun comes out just as I start a long, downhill glide and arrive at the edge of an escarpment. The view is of the Mull of Galloway and, in the distance, the Isle of Man. Off to the tent site because I am tired and very hungry.

Unfortunately the tent site has been converted to a permanent holiday housing site. No tent site for me. The winds off the ocean are howling. The publican at the Cock Inn across the street tries to be helpful and suggests I tent on the beach (so I will be blown away and never be seen again?). As a gesture of kindness, he gives me a bag of crisps to keep me going. I could hang around until they start serving meals and at least get re-energised. My mind is dazed with exhaustion and, stupidly, I decide to carry on. After fifty-eight kilometres at 6pm, I keep pedalling looking for a wild camp site. And I look. And I look. And I look. And finally, ten kilometres later, I arrive at a beach that has a toilet block. It also has houses on the other side of the street. It is 7:30pm. I could just crawl into the toilet block and die.

As I cycle up to it, in the 50kph wind, the toilet block reveals a semi-circular, chest-high wall built behind it. The wall blocks 80% of the wind. I cannot begin to imagine why this wall is here. It seems to serve no purpose at all, other than my desired one of a tent site out of the wind. The footprint is just big enough for my tent. The sign on the toilet block says NO CAMPING. Like I am going to pay attention to THAT. I toss my tent into the semi-circle, make believe it is not over a septic tank, crawl in, and collapse. In the middle of the night someone else drives onto the beach. Are they drug dealers or just lying in wait to steal my bike? In five minutes, I go back to sleep because I am too tired to care. Next morning I realise they are illegally camping, too.

Foodless, I head to Glenluce which, from the map symbols, should be a beehive of activity. It is dead. It is depressing. A transportation planning giant decided to construct a major road bypassing the town. A stake in the heart would have been kinder. I walk up and down the main street of Glenluce looking for a place to have breakfast and meet a local who tells me: “Used to have thirteen restaurants, cafes, and bistros. Now have none. Damn road.” Not a place for tea or food or anything. The other stunning surprise is that Sustrans Route 73 ends here. Someday it will go to Stranraer. Today is not one of those days. This is not a terminus for anything, other than of poor planning and economic depression.

Three routes head out of town: (a) the one I came in on, (b) the A75 east and west that is chock-a-block full of commercial lorries headed for the ferry at Cairnryan, and (c) one north and west on a convoluted routing that will keep me off the A75 for a bit, eventually head towards Stranraer, and goes by Glenluce Abbey. Stoked by yesterday’s unexpected Stone Circle diversion, I hope this will be a similar experience and that Glenluce Abbey may have food.

It isn’t. It doesn’t. Glenluce Abbey has its charms but is generally a tumble of stones with an £8 entry fee. I would pay that for a doughnut right now, but not to see the tumble of stones that I can see from the road. Black mark for them. I am getting really cranky. Can you tell? Try not eating for twelve hours and see what happens to your mental health. Sorry, I don’t mean to be cranky at you.

I am not that far from Stranraer and finally get to a road that looks like where I am supposed to be. It is a nice road. The sign says “Stranraer” – go right. I do. It is Sunday. Nobody will be on this road. Especially since they will be on the A75 that parallels it. I pedal like mad since Stranraer will have food. Four huge trucks, two with trailers, pass by generating a side wind that pushes me into the bushes. Oops. This is the A75. Another 300 metres and four more trucks. I am in serious trouble. The road is busy, the rain has started, and ahead of me are twelve kilometres of this. I pedal faster. The heavens open up. It pours.

I cannot see a metre in front of my face, which means those huge trucks can’t see me, either. I know I am going to die and can hear the conversation at one Lorry Driver’s house tonight:

MA: Well Angus, how were thy day?

DA:​It were an exciting day, Dora. I heard a big thump on my way to Stranraer. I looked out the window and saw Big Bird go flying right off into the bushes. Think I kilt him. What’s for tea?

Just as I know all is lost, an exit sign onto a small access road appears. I take it. Even if it leads nowhere, at least it will increase my life expectancy. With twists and turns, it, too, can lead to Stranraer. After another seven kilometres I come upon yet another A road. I try the same logic I used before (Sunday, traffic will be elsewhere). Miraculously, the sun comes out and the tailwind increases. This is not A75. I get to Stranraer in ten minutes and, after downtrodden Glenluce, expect the worst.

It is not the worst. It is a lovely small town. Tidy with lots of stuff, including food. I run into the first restaurant I see and order everything on the menu. I eat Labrador Retriever-like, in giant bites with lots of grunting and a refusal to make eye contact with the waitress who throws food items on the table to prevent her hand getting mistakenly bitten off. The rain starts. I’ll be damned if I am going to be rained on for another minute. I use the rain as an excuse to order more food, including another appetizer, entrée, and desert. The entire patronage of the restaurant is dazzled by my capacity to consume.

Refreshed, I ride off to my lodging right in the middle of town. I ask the owner where a decent pub is for dinner (I am still food crazed). She recommends the North Castle Hotel behind the police station. I give myself four hours and then, in t-shirt, jumper, and shorts, head off. (I have not given up the shorts, yet, even though it rarely gets above 15 °C and the mornings start in single digits). I find the North Castle. It is a five star hotel. What was the landlady thinking? What the hell. I am here. They can always refuse to seat me. They do not. They are very gracious and plunk me, my t-shirt, and my shorts at a good table amongst twenty very old couples all of whom have dressed for dinner. At the end of the room is a table of thirty Japanese tourists who have also dressed. The food is exquisite. The service is exquisite. The only thing not exquisite is me. The staff are unflaggingly helpful. By the time I have finished my third course and wine, I am a whole new human being. The crazed look extinguished, the staff relax. Glowing, I waddle out the door and trundle home to bed.

I have come to my senses and decide to take the train all the way from Stranraer to near Ardrossan. The route north is going to be the cycling equivalent of bushwhacking. Sustrans does not offer a route north. What is on offer is the A77 carrying the ferry traffic north to Ayr, Prestwick and Glasgow. I have learned my lesson: train it is.

The Stranraer train station is in an abandoned industrial area, once the departure terminal for the ferry. The whole place is desolate and depressing. A new ferry terminal was built twelve kilometres up the coast and opened in 2011. Stranraer’s 150 years of ferry traffic ceased, explaining why the town is here even though the ferry isn’t. Unlike Glenluce, Stranraer seems to be chugging along. The psychological impact of not seeing ferries come in and out must have been distressing. However, the same workers are now driving twelve kilometres further but have jobs. The economic impact is somewhat different than in Glenluce. The impact on the train station, though, is obvious. I am looking at wharf, rusty cranes, battered fencing, a beaten up parking and unloading area. The waiting train is a welcome sight.

I love trains. This one is out of a story book, with upbeat train staff. Unlike England, ScotRail caters lovingly for bikes. In this two car train, six slots are given up to cycles. I load up for the journey. This is a good time to become one with my IPod. Being on busy roads, I haven’t used it much. Not being able to hear cars (and commercial tractor trailers) coming up behind didn’t seem like a good strategy. Music deprived, I know I will be safe on the train. A couple of toots from the horn and I and my train are off. I say this because nobody else is on it.

We pick up more passengers as we rattle along on what may be one of the oldest rail beds in the world. I think the track is tenuously held to its sleepers by prayer. We stop at platforms in the middle of nowhere, reminiscent of my first trip to Scotland. The signalling along the line is obsolete mechanical semaphores. That these could be the originals from the early 20th century is not fanciful. On one section of rail, we slow to a crawl over an aqueduct that is surely early Victorian. The trip is enchanting since I feel propelled back in time.

I learn much on this train trip. First is that even though I think I am singing along to my IPod softly, my singing may be loud enough for everyone in the train car to stare. At me, wondering why I am shouting “Gloria, Gloria, In Excelsis Deo.” It takes forty-five minutes to figure that one out. Second is that I get to eyeball those two mountains and the Nick of the Balloch that I decided not to ride over. I can see them in the distance – huge – straight up and straight down. Good decision. Pat on the back for that one. Third is a corollary of the first. If you fart or burp while using your IPod, YOU may not hear it, but everyone else will. The way to discern this is the odd looks and newspapers waved like fans. It’s nice when train rides are educational. Everyone in my train car stampedes out at Ayr. I am by myself again, all the way to Kilwinning.

Why am I in Kilwinning? I am staying in Irvine at Annfield House. Irvine is the stop before. Damn. Too busy singing. Budget accommodation is hard to find in this built up coastal area, including Kilwinning which had none. Wild camping here, while allowed, smacks of being homeless. Which I am. However, I maintain there is a qualitative difference to camping in a remote rural area to camping under a motorway bridge. Also when I searched for a place to stay, Annfield House came up. It looked very upscale with a peanut price. For one night, the worst it can be is an adventure because the quality of the lodging (high) is not computing given the price (low). After a bakery stop and a solid map read, the cycleway south back to Irvine proves to be traffic free. It follows a lovely stream through a bird reserve, along a golf course, past many pleasant people, and a park. I turn up Castle Street and ride into lovely grounds.

The professional Attadale House greeting is followed by the most dreaded words any cyclist can hear at the end of the day: “Your room is on the second floor.” Oh joy. After travelling all day, I get to drag twenty-six kilograms of wet crap up two flights of stairs. If the place has two flights of stairs, it also means it is Victorian and that the stairs go on forever. Four trips later I collapse in an attic room with a panoramic view of the coast, make tea, crack open a bag of freeze dried food and watch the rain pelt down. In a vain attempt to reduce the fumes wafting off my panniers, I take a bag of clothes to the laundry around the corner. No dice: two days. The pub on the corner is more forthcoming with beer, brightening life. My room is cosy. I am excited. The mainland tour has been fun. However, I have come for the islands, each of them with its own personality. Dreams of Arran dance in my head.

I awake and check the BBC weather report to see what kind of day it will be. It will be: cold, windy, rainy, and unsettled. What a surprise. I go down to breakfast. The man in the breakfast room says, “You are awfully early.” I tell him that I am an early riser and would be happy with some tea until they open. What I do not say is the truth: After that weather report, better I should be in the breakfast room being watched rather than in my room where I may crawl into the bathtub and slit my wrists. Breakfast is ample and yummy. Black pudding has yet to cross my lips. Thoughts of it are so revolting I ask for it to be left off the plate. I discover that belying its looks, a potato scone is not a leaden, grease filled triangle of dough but a rather light and tasty addition. Wrangling the bags down two flights of stairs is only a slight improvement over dragging them up. I ride back to Kilwinning and take a left hand turn. The ferry awaits.

For a built up area it is a nice ride. The one exception is the stretch along the dunes where all the tourist information has waxed eloquently about the conservation area and its beauty. What they failed to mention was that the conservation area is on one side only. The other side is a great long tract of static caravans. Both go on forever. Then there is the beach. It too goes on forever. There are four people on it, all with dogs. Nobody is in the water. I despair of getting to Ardrossan because I am finding that beachside areas in Scotland, as in England, are depressing. I also remember Ardrossan Harbour, an industrial area that went on forever, too. Ugly beyond belief.

But lo and behold, Ardrossan Harbour has changed. It has up-scaled. The ferry terminal is lovely and warm. It is also exciting, full of timetables and places to go. Tea is on offer. For the princely sum of less than £4, I have a spot on the ferry. Echoing ScotRail’s cycle friendly theme, my bike is free. I am pointed to the bike marshalling area and run there in boundless excitement. I am off to Arran and soon to the Inner Hebrides. I cannot wait.





CHAPTER V. Arran





Ardrossan Harbour is the terminus for the Arran Ferry with all that implies: trucks, cars, people wandering around in front of same, tourists, residents, labourers, and cyclists. Make that one cyclist. The staff send me to the big yellow sign next to the ferry off ramp that says “Cyclists Wait Here.” I am totally lost as to what happens next. Not as lost as the car drivers using their mobiles who have rolled down the ramp into the drink. Yellow signs displaying drivers, mobile phones, and descents into waves hang everywhere. One would conclude that the signage appeared after a catastrophe or two.

I watch the high seaward harbour walls. The MV Caledonian Isles appears. Caledonian MacBrayne (CalMac for short) is the main ferry operator on the west, with thirty-three ships. This one is five stories high with its bow headed right towards the loading ramp. How is this going to work? I grab my bike and scurry backwards before the speeding ship rams the dock and rides right up over me. Like a science fiction movie, the entire bow lifts up its giant maw, displaying tractor trailers, caravans, cars, and a treasure trove of transportation. An exhaust plume jets out of the hold as the Captain puts on the brakes. The bow kisses the end of the ramp. An organised frenzy ensues where the ferry disgorges transport vehicles: kids screaming out windows, dogs barking, and ferry staff waving them frantically onwards. Quiet descends.

Ferry staff stand around chatting. Cars and trucks in the marshalling area rev their engines. It’s like the start of Lemans. The ferry loaders yell at anyone who even looks as if they might use a mobile phone. Time to start. A kind man who knows how excited I am about this first ferry trip (because I have told him at least ten times) waves me onto the ship first. I am the only person on the loading ramp. I am the only person in that giant hold except for ferry personnel. I am so excited that I run all the way to the stern. The loading team then chases me all the way back to the bow and the bike space. A crewman ties my bike with the ropes hanging off the wall. I am expecting to see a heap of metal and panniers when I return. Meanwhile, tractor trailers and caravans are headed my way.

After four yells, and two points, I find the stairs and run up to explore the ship. The CalMac ferries are heavily subsidised, wonderful for me since I will be ferry hopping for a while. CalMac has also figured out another major revenue stream: catering. The MV Caledonian Isles has a super clean cafeteria with all kinds of choice. Menus speak proudly of supporting island producers and businesses. The food is infinitely above the standard I would expect from a monopoly, with the biscuits I eat from the Isle of Mull. The wind dies. The two hour sun filled crossing is on flat water. I stay on the top deck watching Ardrossan recede and Arran come into view.

Midway through the trip across the Firth of Clyde, the Captain announces the ship will stop so that the crew can take part in the National Moment of Silence to honour the London bombing victims of ten years ago. The ship horn sounds. We stop. Even with the unsupervised kids running around the deck, the minute is unexpectedly moving. The ship’s horn sounds again. We pick up speed. Reflecting on how truly fortunate I am, for reasons other than that my bike is intact, I get off, last, at Brodick.

Arran is a big island, so much so that it sports enough topographical diversity to be referred to as “Scotland in Miniature.” South are lowlands, pastures, and farming. North is a National Scenic Area with the towering rocky peak of Goatfells (874m). Viewed from Ayrshire across the Firth of Clyde, Goatfells with its neighbouring peaks look like a prostrate figure named the “Sleeping Warrior.” Arran has been inhabited since Neolithic[2] times, with standing stones, stone circles, and all the associated archaeology. The Bronze Age and Iron Age came and went, leaving appropriate ruins including, respectively, cairns and a fort. The Vikings arrived, then ceded the land back to the Scottish Crown which in 1503 created the Earl of Arran. The Earl is responsible for Brodick Castle. His descendants are responsible for clearing 2,000 of the 6,500 population in the early 19th century, sending them to Quebec, and devastating the island’s Gaelic culture. Arran’s population has never recovered.

To read the history of Arran is to read about Scottish social history in miniature: wars, plunder, invasion by the English, predation by the aristocracy, and the whole colourful social fabric of Scotland. The geology is exciting, too, with a rock outcropping of multilayered rock types near Lochranza providing early proof that the earth was not formed as biblically explained but produced through natural operations over many ages. First, though, to the B&B. Several hundred metres straight up, I find Carrick Lodge, unload the bike, and then ride back into Brodick with a stunning view afore me. I stop at the Coop for snacks, visit Brodick Castle, and discover that traffic on the Sustrans Route north to Lochranza is just awful. The road is incredibly narrow. The tourist traffic flys by. The road directly west, the String, is even worse. I will be heading south and circumnavigating the island. However, not before I have a beer and ponder the fate of three long distance swimmers who, in 14 °C water, are headed out to sea.

Carrick Lodge is a Victorian pile with many nooks, crannies, books, and knick-knacks. After a good sleep, I head down for breakfast. There is porridge on the menu, which I order to precede the FULL SCOTTISH BREAKFAST. The porridge arrives in a wash basin. I have never seen so much porridge. Advertising tells us that this B&B is especially known for the quality of its porridge. How can oats taste like anything but oats? How am I supposed to eat this washbasin full of porridge and still eat the FULL SCOTTISH BREAKFAST? The Scottish are incredibly frugal. Will I end up on the B&B blacklist if I waste food? Surprisingly, the porridge is really good. Doesn’t taste remotely like the stuff that comes in the one-minute sachets. So good, I eat it all. As I am discovering at odd times on this trip, I am hungry enough that I eat the FULL SCOTTISH BREAKFAST as well (black pudding-less). The B&B lady cheerfully tells me the weather is changing. The winds will come from the south (oh joy, a headwind again), and it will get cold. Colder than this? Will there be ice and snow? Semi-mobile, I clamber onto my bike to discover whether the A-Roads on Arran are life threatening.

They are, and they aren’t. The first stretch of road is from the ferry to the next village, Lamlash. Everyone and anyone goes this way, including trucks and other big vehicles. The hill from my B&B continues up along this road for a good five kilometres. Since there is no verge, I hog my lane and pray that when I hear the basso profundo of an approaching truck, there will be a small space for me to dismount. Because it is early in the morning, I miss the ferry traffic. Altogether, traffic is distinctly lighter. I get to the top of the hill, pitifully exhausted by the meagre 114m climb, and have fantastic views. It’s then a zoom down into Lamlash with views over Holy Island, home of the Centre for World Peace and Health, a Tibetan Buddhist Retreat. I am welcome to come to Holy Isle for the day and walk, as well as join in life there. Interesting as that sounds, I am hell-bent on avoiding the traffic and head to Kildonan with its camp site.

The road hugs the coast, the traffic disappears, and the views just keep on coming. West are trees. East is the Firth of Clyde and the coast of Ayrshire. South is Whiting Bay and a brief tea stop before riding past cairns, fort, standing stones, chambered cairns, enclosure, and “Giants’ Graves,” the remains of two Neolithic chambered cairns. All, in less than five kilometres. I am completely overwhelmed by the archaeology, so much so that I stop at none of it. I am feeling more than a little adrift, even though I certainly am not lost since there is only one road and one way to go. I think it’s the uncertainties of travelling solo on a bike. I am a Virgo, a bono fide control freak, who has miniscule control over anything anymore. My one discovered comfort is pitching my tent, crawling into it, and having soup. Flying by all the ruins, I stop frequently to take in the panoramic views of water and coast, managing to make myself feel even more insignificant in the process.

A sharp left hand turn takes me down the slope to Kildonan, the Sound of Pladda, and tempestuous seas. Kildonan has a number of good sized, well maintained detached white houses. Part of Arran’s prosperity owes itself to its proximity to Glasgow. In a forty minute train ride, a Glaswegian can get from Central Station to Ardrossan, jump onto the ferry, and in two hours be on Arran. Thus the majority of the tourists I am seeing are not from somewhere else, but from Scotland. Many of the lovely Kildonan cottages either belong to them or are self-catering enterprises for their benefit. Some families have been coming to Arran for decades. This explains that while farming does happen here, Arran does not “feel” like the farming communities I rode through in Galloway. Farming would be a challenge here, anyway.

At the southern end of Arran, Kildonan is the first point of call for the prevailing, relentless south-westerlies. I arrive at the caravan park where caravans are chained to the ground. The tents are flat with the wind. I bang on the door of the office and get the tour. The owner points out a kettle and proudly describes the positive reviews of his establishment. I think, the kettle is such a small idea but such a monumentally good one. Imagine trying to start off my conflagration of a stove in this weather. My tent site is next to the other flat tents. This is depressing. I don’t even try to pitch mine because I am afraid it will blow away.

I walk over to the Kildonan Inn instead. I am still new to this cycle touring thing and miss that the Kildonan Inn is a hostel. For £10 I can get a bed in a stone building with beer. I completely overlook this, drown my sorrows for a bit, and then go back to my patch of grass. Another self-talk about Big Girl pants and the tent goes up, miraculously standing tall in this howling gale. I snuggle in its doorway, looking out over the island of Pladda and a lighthouse that was not built by the Stevenson family but in 1790 by Thomas Smith. It takes little to see why it was built early and here. Pladda Sound is one solid sheet of ledge that I can see at low tide but a ship could not see at high tide or night. It is unnavigable. Lots of wrecks, including a WWII U-boat. Like most lighthouses, this one is accompanied by a substantial dwelling with rock walled fields so that the keeper could maintain animals and grow vegetables protected from the wind. I visualise life on Pladda and feel less disconnected. The kettle, soup, and a snuggle in my sleeping bag take care of the rest.

Today is meant to be a full day. Last night I was excited about having a south-west wind at my back, pushing me along north since I will round the southern tip of Arran. I wake to a northerly wind that has a tinge of the artic. This is not hyperbole. When the wind blows from the north, it carries microscopic ice particles. That’s what I say because it is freezing. I climb up from Kildonan and ride west along the southern coast to Kilmory and the Lagg Hotel. The Lagg Hotel was built in 1791 as a coaching inn and looks it, although all bright and shiny. I am learning how things work here. If a building looks like a lodging and the door is open, I can walk in and accost someone for tea and/or food. They are usually glad for the trade. I am usually delighted because I am cold and/or starving. In this case both. Taking down the tent and packing up in the wind doesn’t make for a comforting breakfast scenario. The kettle got me hot tea, but that’s it. Here I get tea, scones, jam, a big slab of butter, and respite. The Lagg is also located in a valley with a stream running through it, surrounded by trees. Absolutely charming and good for mental health because I am now turning north, into that headwind.

By late afternoon, I am exhausted. Pedalling downhill has never been one of my favourite activities. Progress is glacially slow. I realise…I am just tired. I haven’t paid much attention, but it has been ten straight days in the saddle. I carry on through Blackwaterfoot with its incongruous Best Western Hotel and tour buses. Ahead on the right is a concentration of cairns, chambered cairns, hut circles, standing stone, and stone circles. I walk down the unrideable, rutted dirt road to see these things, visiting some of them. After a kilometre, I have no will to continue. I spy the stone circles in the distance, give up, and drag myself back to the main road. I soldier along for another thirteen kilometres, at every turn hoping for a B&B, a camp ground, or anything to get me out of this cold wind. My prayers are finally answered when I arrive at Catacol Bay and the Catacol Bay Hotel. It is in the middle of nowhere and my last hope. I crawl up the front stairs to the bar and ask if they have a room. They do. It is mine for two nights.

The Catacol Hotel is family owned. I meet all of them. My bike is stabled in the workshop out back amidst car parts and man projects. She is happy there, chatting with the other mechanical things. In the middle of nowhere, the Catacol boasts that they have good food. I am too tired to care about food but drag myself off to a hot shower and bed. Next day is hunker down day because the skies open up. The Catacol has a mooring across the street suitable for up to twenty ton yachts in Force 9 winds. While I see a yacht headed south with the raging north wind at its back, it couldn’t stop if it wanted to. I can’t imagine where it is going to moor in this terrible weather. I am reading books, making tea, eating camping food, readings books, making tea, and eating biscuits. In between, I sit looking out the window over Kibrannan Sound to the Kintyre Peninsula that becomes visible in between deluges.

I try to get a third night out of the Catacol since decadence is addictive. No dice. I finally head downstairs to find that the food is very good. As per previous escapades, I order half the menu over a two hour period. The clientele is purely local. People drive from all parts of west Arran to have a drink, a meal, or play pool. My book and I have hung around long enough that the locals assume I am part of the fabric of life. Next to me at the bar, one of the locals waxes eloquent about his hate of tourists. I can’t resist. I introduce myself. He then says it isn’t really ALL tourists he hates, just cyclists. The pub owner whispers in his ear. As his face turns bright red, we all laugh hysterically. It is like being in a club for a couple of days. I don’t feel so lonely anymore.

Day three arrives with an encouraging semi-sun. I wave goodbye to the Twelve Apostles, a series of attached fisherman’s cottages, each with a different upper window. Wives would light a candle in the window. From his boat on the Kilbrannan Sound, each fisherman would know his home and the loved one waiting for him. That’s the story. The windows all look similar to me and from out on Kilbrannan Sound in pitching waves, I can’t imagine how that would work. The road north to Lochranza hugs a tall, scrub covered cliff so close to its edge that if I dismount, my left foot is on the beach. The road is a two lane A Road, a traffic management monument to wishful thinking since its one lane is barely wide enough for my bike. Bad weather and a high tide would obliterate it. The cliff, Cnoc Leacainn, continues for three kilometres into Lochranza, making the ride very dramatic with tall rocks and trees on the right, stone shingle beach and blue-green water on the left. The name “Lochranza” shows as large bold-faced type on the OS map. Perhaps this is because of the 13th century Lochranza Castle ruins. Perched on a low promontory, surrounded by water and steep hills, the Castle is another postcard setting. I am early for the ferry and ride into Lochranza expecting to spend some time in civilisation.

I never find it. Lochranza is a castle, ferry stop, and a distillery that is not open at 7am. A hotel near the pier offers sustenance, but I am chock full from the Catacol’s breakfast. Still hopeful that the large bold-faced type is indicative of an actual settlement, since my immediate future involves lots of places with the same large bold-faced type, I find a side road that shows promise. Instead it leads to Newton Point and a sign informing me that I could walk another mile through boggy land to Hutton’s Unconformity that provided his theoretical basis that the earth was eons old. I settle for looking at the raised beach, a beach that popped up after the weight of glaciers melted away, and glacial erratics, large boulders that ended up in peculiar positions when the ice below and around them disappeared. Chastened by my mis-interpretation (large bold-faced type means…perhaps a hotel if you are lucky), I head back to the ferry.

The ferry will take me to the Kintyre Peninsula which I have been admiring in the distance for the past three days. It runs north/south like Arran with a slightly larger land mass and lots of wind turbines. Being a National Scenic Area has saved Arran from that fate. The tip of Kintyre is twenty kilometres from Northern Ireland and the Celtic influence is historical and linguistic. The topography of this whole region consists of large, long terrestrial fingers surrounded, or fragmented, by water. Peninsulas, islands, lochs, sounds, and dramatic scenery abound. The Kintyre Peninsula could be an island with only a small one mile isthmus between it and its next northerly connection, Knapland.

The Vikings thought so, too. Magnus the Barefoot decided he would like dominion over the islands and Kintyre Peninsula back in 1093. To keep the peace, King Malcom of Scotland agreed that Magnus could have all the western lands that he could circle by boat. After all, how many rocky little islands could Magnus circumnavigate during the allotted time and what value were they anyway? Never underestimate a Viking. Sitting at the tiller, Magnus roared delightedly as his men dragged their longship across the same small one mile isthmus. Magnus then claimed the lush, fertile Kintyre Peninsula and much more, including Arran and Bute, as his very own. The history of this area is incredibly rich and tumultuous.

The ferry taking me to it is now headed my way, chugging across Kilbrannan Sound from Claonaig. Claonaig shows on the map in small, unbold type. I am starting to think this means…nothing there. The MV Loch Tarbert arrives. It carries only eighteen cars. The loading ramp, also small, still sports many “Don’t You Dare Use Your Mobile Phone” signs. The wind has died for a smooth thirty minute crossing. The views towards Arran, in the blazing sun with blue-azure water sparkling and colours ablaze, are breathtaking.





CHAPTE VI. Kintyre and Knapland





I am right about “nothing there.” In a continued quest for efficiency, ferries do not always run from population centre to population centre, say Lochranza (arguably a centre) to Tarbert (truly is). Ferries run from the closest road to the closest road. The ferry accordingly deposits me at Claonaig. Claonaig is defined as a hamlet. My OS map tells me the Ferry Terminal is located here. The Claonaig I am looking at is: a sea container, a phone booth, a dumpster, recycling bin, and ferry marshalling area the size of a backyard patio. Ferry Terminal means: the ferry terminates here. No building exists, other than one white farmhouse far, far in the distance. The signs are in Gaelic first, English after. Nonetheless, looking back on Arran, it is hard to be grouchy. The view fills my soul.

Tarbert is eleven something left. In weeks of riding, I have never resolved whether the numbers on road signs are in miles or kilometres. Sample experimentation would indicate “random.” I use this uncertainty to play mind games with myself. For example, the OS maps shows that the road to Tarbert has a dreaded “arrow.” A single arrow means a gradient steeper than fourteen degrees. A double arrow means steeper than twenty degrees. Put the end of your pencil on your desk (90°). Halve that (45°). Halve that again (22.5°). Now, put yourself on a bicycle with twenty-six kilograms of gear riding up that pencil and think, “Why would I ever want to do that?” I don’t want to, either. I am discovering that the options here in rural Scotland are limited. You either take that road, or go 200 kilometres out of your way if there even is an alternative, which there usually is not. Or, you swim. To cope, I convince myself that the arrow is fourteen degrees and the eleven on the sign is in kilometres. Shallowest and shortest. Delusions are us. I head, up, up, and finally straight up to find that today, at least, the downhill ride is a pleasant reward, landing me on the A83 to Tarbert.

A tractor trailer blows me off the road. Two factors make this stretch of road very exciting. Five thousand people live in Campbelltown, at the southern end of the Kintyre Peninsula. Its deliveries are by truck, using the A83. Second, the ferry to Islay, land of all things whiskey, terminates here on the A83. I manage to arrive here when the returning delivery traffic from Campbelltown coincides with arrival of the multi-deck, coach bus carrying ferry. The sun has used up its wattage for the day. Taking advantage, the rain has recommenced. Visibility is zilch. Defeated and soggy, I choose life, step off into the bushes, and eat chocolate. Three coach buses roar by.

I am learning to change my expectations about what I will find in these new lands. A different rhythm of life, with an ebb and flow, replaces the 9 to 5 continuity pattern of cities. Instead of being unsettling, this energy is becoming interesting since I can rarely predict it. I am also unclear about what level of civilisation I will find. Based on the last week’s experience, I would not have predicted Tarbert. It is one of the most scenic places ever and a really lively town. Tarbert sports a much protected harbour surrounded 280 degrees by colourful buildings full of everything one could need. Even though I have entered through the proverbial back door, Tarbert is only two hours plus a twenty minute ferry ride from Glasgow. Not really the back of beyond, but close.

The post office is in a store, as all post offices now seem to be. My “Package to Self” has arrived, bringing a feeling of Christmas mixed with comfort. Who would think powdered drink mix and freeze dried packages of spaghetti bolognaise could have that effect? I ask the helpful staff when I might be able to ship out my return packages since tomorrow is Sunday. Unlike most of Scotland which doesn’t get in gear until 9am on weekdays, everything in Tarbert is hopping at 7:30 am, including Sunday. I’m very sceptical on this one. However, when I appear at 7:30am sharp the next morning, I am third in the queue. My packages are headed to adventurous places: post offices in the middle of nowhere on islands with populations of less than 150 people. If this works, “All hail the Royal Mail.”

Tarbert is home to many fine eating establishments. Someone long ago mentioned the Starfish Restaurant and Gallery. They are booked out, but as I am early the hostess kindly offers that I can eat as long as I promise to vacate my table by 7pm. It is 5:30pm. I can manage that. One of the Starfish’s specialities is fish pie. This is either going to be like the oatmeal at Carrick Lodge, an unexpected treat, or bland, boring potatoes and fish. Nothing ventured. I order smoked salmon as a starter (with a wonderful wine) and the fish pie. The smoked salmon comes with both cold and hot smoked salmon, a combination I have never had. It is fabulous. The fish pie, full of all kinds of seafood, is beyond description. It is far and away the best meal I have had on this trip.

As I return to the hotel I am thinking: things might be looking up. This is important because I have made another decision that does not meet standard. The original planned route is through Knapland. As I scrutinise the map, it is one of those Sustrans routes that is beautiful but repeatedly up and down. It is also accompanied by arrows that indicate 14% and 20% grade changes. That works for those boys on their road bikes. It does not work for me. Instead, I am going to make a potentially more dangerous run for it up the A83 to Lochgilphead. My logic is that if I leave early enough on Sunday morning there will be little traffic and certainly less big truck traffic. I can book it for the thirteen kilometres.

Which, I do. I pedal like a mad woman because there is some traffic. It is certainly not a flat trip. I marvel at the road edge on one section that is one half metre away from a five metre straight drop into Loch Fyne. No guardrails. I can’t imagine how this road meets any design standard. I am particularly glad there are no trucks or buses. As I left Tarbert what preceded me out of town was a coach bus, the big huge kind, presumably from the ferry. I knew I had a two hour window before the next Islay ferry flooded the road with killer transport. Thankfully, I make it to Lochgilphead intact.

In the pouring rain this time. The campground is highly suspect. Lochgilphead is the town planning equivalent of a bus station. Traffic zooms in and right out again. Lochgilphead doesn’t seem to have much going on as a community. Tarbert was more vibrant. I enter the campground where a full-on domestic is underway. A father is shrieking absolutely horrible things at his fifteen year old son. The son looks like an intransigent fifteen year old, but with tears running down his face.

An older man and woman come over from their residence and act as though this is all normal. Not normal for me. In a cognitive lull, I let them take my money. I ask for a spot that is relatively protected. They tell me I can put my tent out by the tree. The older man takes me around the corner and points to the tree which is two metres tall and has no leaves. It is on the edge of a flood plain. The entire campground is underwater. The BBC weather people have been saying that the ground in Scotland is “saturated.” They are not kidding. I am so depressed at the whole situation that I sit in the garage shed offered to store my bike. It has a roof and a small picnic bench where I can compose myself while waiting for a break in the weather to set up the tent. Meanwhile, the domestic revs itself up again with people screaming and yelling at each other for another half an hour.

At least this place has a laundry. This is good because I am freezing. I stand in front of the outside dryer vent for twenty minutes trying to get warm. Then I go inside and embrace an operating dryer. I wonder why are there eight dryers and eight washing machines, as I strip off my jacket and toss it into a dryer to try and dry it out/warm it up/and avoid hypothermia. The answer to the eight question is: this place serves as the launderette for all of Southern Scotland. Let me tell you what kind of dodgy people drive into the place. I am now afraid to pitch my tent but am assured they will all be gone at 9pm when the laundry is locked. There is no Plan B. I have checked to see if there is anyplace else to stay. The answer: no. I wait for a break in the rain that occurs for about ten minutes, find a tiny patch of ground that is not under water, pitch the tent, crawl into it, and wonder what I was thinking to do this stupid trip. I send a depressing email to my daughter who immediately responds with an experience of her own that makes me laugh hysterically and reflect that it could be worse. However, I also realise that I am depressed primarily from the lack of sunlight – or any kind of light. So something needs to happen in that department.

Because the weather forecast is horrible, I formulate the brilliant idea of capitalising on Lochgilphead’s bus station status. There is an island (Gigha) I want to see off the west coast of the Kintyre Peninsula but the only way to get to it is on the A83. If I take a bus trip to the end of the Kintyre Peninsula, I will get to visit Campbelltown which was not on the itinerary but a place of note. I will also be able to see what the A83 is like. Maybe after the ferry terminal, the road widens out and the traffic drops off. Next morning, I hop on the bus for Campbelltown. This means backtracking to Tarbert and seeing what the traffic is like on a weekday. I am SO GLAD I left Tarbert on Sunday. Tractor trailer follows tractor trailer follows cement truck follows crane. Construction trucks. Crazed drivers. A relentless flow of traffic. We pass two cyclists who narrowly avoid being smooshed as I watch.

Time to pee before Tarbert. That trip south is going to be wobbly. Bus toilets are a challenge at the best of times. Just before we wheel into Tarbert, I jump into the bus loo and drop my trousers. The moment my trousers hit the floor, the bus driver hits the gas. The floor jumps out from underneath me. I go flying backwards, not onto the toilet seat, either. I try to stand up, with a full bladder and my trousers tight around my ankles, and just as I do the bus driver jams on the brakes. I fly forward and smash my head on the front loo wall. I am now concussed, bursting, and being tossed around like a Weeble. I try bracing my arms against the sides and stretching my feet apart as, WHAM, the bus driver stomps on the gas yet again. I fall, thankfully, at least close enough to the toilet seat that I can manoeuvre onto it. Is this some kind of tourist abuse? Do they just see you coming and decide, let’s see if we can finish this one off? I stumble out of the bus loo and everyone is looking because the smashing noise must have been incredible, like an unbalanced washing machine on spin. I plop back in my seat and strap on my seat belt, tight, waiting to see how this A-Road is.

It is a dual carriageway which in this part of Scotland means it is 1.75 lanes. It has NO verge. The bus ride south closely parallels Mr Toad’s Wild Ride. Our bus travels at 100kph missing tractor trailers, commercial lorries, and huge coach buses heading straight at us. At the likely point of impact, both sides go off the road, regroup, and carry on with no speed diminishment. I am glad I brought a Diet Coke because breakfast is terrified, wanting to jump ship at every near miss. I get my answer. I am not going to Gigha.

The road to Campbelltown is perhaps the most UNSCENIC I have seen so far. This is because the coast is littered with static caravans and static caravan parks. They are all painted Wilderness Green to be environmentally friendly. The colour is not a success. Where is all their septic waste going? I wonder a lot about infrastructure on this trip. Where is the water coming from since, in the middle of nowhere, is it likely that Scotland Water is setting up a water treatment plant? Is the wastewater getting the same level of attention? Not the power, I can tell you that. There is power to every blessed house in Scotland, no matter how far from civilisation it is. Why this is so is beyond me. I have seen power poles run for twelve kilometres across impossible boggy and rocky terrain to serve a two room croft. The bus unloads us in the pouring rain. I have four hours to explore Campbelltown, home of whisky and greed.

There used to be a huge number of distilleries in Campbelltown but when speculation came in, distillers realised that they could get a lot for futures on their barrels of whiskey and that no one would know the quality was awful until at least ten years out. So everyone went for the futures, filled the barrels with crap whiskey, someone found out and the market collapsed. Three distilleries now operate in Campbelltown and only one is of note. I cannot bring myself to do a whiskey tasting. If it upsets my stomach further, it is a long ride back to the laundrette campground that specialises in domestics. I wander purposelessly around the small whiskey visitor centre, zip up my rain jacket and head back out into the rain.

At the top of Main Street, I find a very nice museum full of local culture and one very strange older man, attired in shreds of tartan and holding a cane. He decides I am his new best mate. He follows me through the museum and, clearly disturbed, starts nattering on about where he comes from. I decide to be Christian and sit down to listen because, otherwise, he is going to glom onto the volunteer museum staff. He has some interesting tales to tell. Eyes flitting left and right, spit flying everywhere, I am wondering where this is going. It heads to the word “sex” where the eyes turn into pie plates and begin to corkscrew. So do mine. I flee back down Main Street, find a nice used bookstore and buy a book.

The owner recommends the Fresh Byte Café, a thirty seat hole in the wall, for local food. The Byte has nothing to do with computers. A sign outside says: Special of the Day – Haggis, Tatties, and Neeps. What the hell. The day is a disaster anyway. Time for a real adventure. I find a one person corner table and order up the Special. The plate comes with three piles on it. One is smashed potatoes. One is cubes of turnips. The third appears to be Labrador Retriever vomit. I know this is not possible because I had a Labrador Retriever. When they throw up, they stare at it for, at most, two seconds before they scarf it all back down again. A small brave taste discloses that it is pungent. If you cut the strong taste with the potatoes and neeps, and this is a worry when neeps are used as a diluting agent, it is very tasty.

I have a couple of the mixed mouthfuls and think…hey, this is doable. On the third mouthful I get what feels like a large rubber band. As I chew and chew, aware that haggis is made from all the parts of the sheep left over after the good bits have been taken away, I try not to visualise what this large rubber band might be. Next bite is a smaller rubber band. But what the heck. It is absolutely yummy. Perfect wet, cold weather, comfort food. Initiated into one Scottish gastronomic club, I fantasise black pudding may be the next. The Byte’s owner, who has been watching with great interest, since I mentioned this was a first for me, is most pleased since he is proud of his haggis. As he should be. I eat every bit.

The return bus arrives. We stampede on to get out of the weather. Hats off to Argyll and Bute Council for their bus transportation. There is no place you cannot get to on a bus, either provided directly by the council or organised by them. The schedules are such that you can go to the Big Smoke, do your shopping, and get back in a reasonable timeframe, too. Or, connect with a ferry or another bus that gets you even further afield. Many of the buses (although not the one to Gigha, because I know you were thinking that) will take your bike. Same for the subsidised ferries. They take your bike for free. It all makes these communities accessible and vibrant. I did not expect it. It has been a joy. In the bus home I find myself inoculated with Scottish insouciance from my haggis meal. I don’t fasten my seat belt. I don’t grab the hand rail, except for the one time when we run off the road when a cement truck rounds the blind corner. The static caravans aren’t looking quite so bad. I don’t go to the loo, that’s for sure. The sun comes out. I have one last look at lovely Tarbert as we hurtle north. Life is looking less bleak. The campground holds no charms for the night, but I depart tomorrow and the water is outside my tent, not in it. Small blessings and all that.

I am off to Tayvallich and the ferry to Jura, one of the Inner Hebrides. Jura is meant to be a hauntingly beautiful island with one of the world’s best distilleries. The ferry is run by the Jura Development Trust. Many of the rural areas and islands have development trusts, community foundations, or some similar not for profit organisation that provides an umbrella to support island life. The scope of their activities is extensive, from community shops (and post offices) to transportation, like the Jura Passenger Ferry. The ferry literature bears this admonition: “If you have back or neck problems, you should NOT ride with us.” The pictures don’t look like a real ferry, either. It looks more like a souped up speed boat. They say they will take bikes, so off I go.

The ride south to Tayvallich is a long one because I am taking a major diversion north through Kilmartin Glen. With 5,000 years of history and 150 prehistoric monuments, Kilmartin is thought by some to be the birthplace of Scotland. The sun is out, and I am mightily energised as my rain induced seasonal affective disorder recedes. The first four kilometres is along the Crinan Canal and great fun because it is pancake flat. The Canal opened in 1801 to provide a route between the Clyde and Inner Hebrides. It now provides a route for pleasure craft, a sailboat heading east as I head west. At the first lock, I veer off north to Kilmartin Glen, wondering what all the fuss is about.

The next twenty kilometres is through three glens that are absolutely littered with Neolithic artefacts. I love Neolithic things. Aside from being 5,000 years old and the remains of people who nobody has any idea of who they were or how they got there, they overwhelm you with a sense of community, work and spirituality that is so antithetical to what I was taught. There are standing stones, stone circles, rock carvings, cairns, and crannogs. Many places have cup and ring marked stones, described as Neolithic art although nobody knows what they mean. Imagine yourself with your hand held rock, chinking away at your big rock to make a cup indentation. Try this in your back yard and see how long it takes. Then imagine you are making fifty cups, decorating some with rings. The amount of work involved is mind boggling and indicates the Neolithic people here had both technology and determination. More significant, because the cups and rings have no obvious practical use, these people had art, or spirituality, or community, or a combination of all these things. They are not the primitives I was taught about.

As I ride along, the archaeology inundates me. Standing stone here. Stone circle there. The glens through which I ride have a spirituality themselves, a statement at which any sane person is now laughing. I am not a touchy-feely kind of person. As I ride over a hill and descend into a wide glen filled with prehistoric monuments, I see a flat plain, a river, and protective hills. I see a fertile, safe place. I feel embraced and not alone, even though I am.

If I were invaded, I could scurry through the glen’s back door up to Loch Leathan. Here I would find a crannog, an island in the middle of the loch created by depositing rocks. Nobody knows how or why crannogs were built and used, but Scotland is littered with them. As I look at this one, it is obvious to me why it is here and visualise people taking sanctuary while the boat-less invaders stand on shore. I ride by Loch Leathan, after passing a standing stone being used as a gate post, into the next glen where everything is repeated: fertile plain, river, protective hills, Neolithic monuments, Loch Ederline and its crannog. The Gulf Stream affects the climate of this area. I don’t know what it would have been like 5,000 years ago. It is verra nice today.

I swing south and head to Kilmartin with its museum and a more holistic historic presentation, from Neolithic to recent. This experience is a counterpoint to my freeform ride through the previous two glens. There is nothing spiritual going on here. The prehistoric monuments are more significant, in terms of size and complexity, but the life has been ripped out of them with all the infrastructure, fences, and tourist accoutrements. The Museum is a gem in all this. It is a novelty in that it is run by its own charitable trust, not one of the major ones. Thus, a more local flavour, including encouragement to head to the Kilmartin Church and Graveyard with its well preserved medieval stone slabs.

Interesting as all this is, it is not speaking to me. Perhaps the A road and the tour buses. I find a back road that follows the various monuments south, including two large cairns, to Temple Wood and its stone circle. As grand as these all are, they were once much grander with the stones appropriated over the last 5,000 years to build other things, like fences, homes, and barns. What fascinates me is that so often the rocks for all these things came from far away. How did they get them here and, as for the case of cairns, in such quantities?

Pondering, I continue south visiting Moine Mhor National Nature Reserve along the way. It is a bog. Bushwhacking through some trees, I come to its edge and see a birder’s delight. For the rest of us, it is waterlogged green stuff. Low on energy, I take a chance that Crinan and the end of the canal might provide some respite because Tayvallich is not close. The totally unexpected three story Crinan Hotel appears, complete with art gallery on the top floor and Michelin listed restaurant. The hotel is meant to be 200 years old. It screams Art Deco to me. It also screams, food! I order seafood which is now everywhere. Lunch is served by staff who echo the Art Deco theme. Across the Sound of Jura I see Jura itself, my first Inner Hebridean island. With its peaks, the sun, and the excitement of it all, I finish in a rush, jump on my bike, and begin the twelve kilometre ride to Tayvallich.

This part of Scotland is the right half of Canada/America, were there no Atlantic Rift. This afternoon’s ride could be through New England or the Canadian Maritimes. The land is well wooded which cannot be said of most of Scotland. There are lochs everywhere, both sea and freshwater. I follow an arm of Loch Sween, narrow and long. The ride is enchanting. The road is winding, and after the first climb, it is a cruisy ride to the Leachive Caravan Park. No trees here but a welcoming owner and clean site. He fills me with local information including: the ferry does not run on Wednesday. So much for that fine planning.

This is a good introduction into what I will discover is the island rhythm of life. There is nothing for 10 - 12 kilometres or more. Then, there is something, usually a settlement or some kind of lodging. In Tayvallich it is a settlement with caravan park, pub, shop, and coffee shop. It’s a great coffee shop, too. An artist community is in residence. The rest of the houses appear to be self-catering accommodation. Less than 200 people claim year round residence. The road goes to nowhere. Who is supporting all these businesses? A puzzle for another day, I think, as I walk down to the shop/café and ask about the Jura ferry.

This is another part of my education. In these small settlements, everyone knows where everything is and knows everyone else. Signage is unnecessary, unless you happen to be me. I bumble around finally figuring out that if I ask the shop owner about the ferry, she will call the captain on her landline since no mobiles work here. If the ferry is running (which it may not), he will get the message (sometime), call her when it is convenient (for him), and provide an answer (perhaps) or request for additional information (more likely). I will then reappear at the shop (sometime) and be informed (or not). This stresses me out. I want a ticket window and a ticket. I want a spot on that boat because it only has twelve seats. I want to know how this bike thing is going to work because I look at the promotional photos and that boat doesn’t look bike friendly to me. In a lather, I wander back to the campground and settle in for the night. The weather has turned for the better. The wind has died. The sun is out, until 11pm. Time to look on the bright side.

Evidently everyone in town has heard about the frenzied cycle tourist in a lather. Repeated new acquaintances suggest that on Wednesday, instead of darkening their door, I take myself south on the road to nowhere. Tayvallich breathes a collective sigh of relief when the sun comes out, I have coffee, and without a ticket for the Jura Passenger Ferry, I leave them in peace. My caravan host provides directions: go south. He encourages me to go to the Jetty at the end which seems like a good potential lunch spot. The road follows Linne Mhuirich, a wetlands across from which is the Taynish National Nature Reserve, all as scenic as my ride down to Tayvallich. Far across the Loch of Sween I spy Castle Sween surrounded by Castle Sween Holiday Park and enough static caravans to constitute a city.

It is appalling. Only two hours from Glasgow, and somehow managing to get planning permission for urban blight, the park stretches both north and south of the Castle, a stone castle of 12th century origins. My plans were to ride over to visit Castle Sween but absolutely not now. I look left to urban blight and right to the unparalleled beauty of Jura. The mind reels. What do these people do on holiday? Swimming and beach are not two of them because there is no beach and the water is frigid. I get a crick in my neck looking only right.

Near the end of the road on a hill is Keills Chapel with its treasures within. Rehabilitated and reroofed, it now houses a number of medieval grave slabs and stone crosses, including the two metre high Keills Cross. The cross dates from the 8th/9th century and is carved with lions, saints, intricate latticework and leaf. This is a collection worthy of a museum. Here it is, unguarded, with a wooden bench for me to sit on and take it all in. Where Kilmartin and its glens were littered with the Neolithic, this area is littered with chapels or beehive monk cells, medieval and earlier. I can see three chapels from my vantage point on the hill. The view towards Jura holds me there a while, awestruck.

Puzzled as to why the jetty comes so highly recommended, I climb back down to the bike and head there. It is an eventful ride thanks to the gates and cow that refuses to move one inch off the road. I know nothing of cattle and “shoo” isn’t working. It is a large fuzzy cow with horns and a calf. We stand-off for twenty minutes. She decides I am a wimp and moves on (only later do I learn that mother cows tend to trample cyclists who threaten their calves). I continue past a small house, arriving at the jetty. It is a lovely lunch spot. Straight across is Jura and its Paps, the name for its three highest mountains. Jura’s long coastline looks unpopulated and wild. Today, the Sound of Jura looks calm, a sailboat passing by in the sunlight.

It would have been on one of these calm days that drovers swam the cattle from Lagg on Jura to this jetty, a trip of over eight kilometres. I did not even know that cows could swim. To learn they annually drove herds of them across to this spot is astonishing. That some of the cattle first swam to Jura from Islay across the Sound of Islay with its screaming tidal currents is more mind numbing. Who first came up with this idea? How did the pilot test go?

I am being steadily yanked out of normal expectations. People here do things differently, more directly, and with creativity. Maybe it’s time to get into the swing of things. I decide to stop stressing about the Jura Passenger Ferry, enjoy my ride back, and have ice cream. My new attitude is rewarded with the message, “You have a seat and we will take your bike. Be on the dock at 9:00am.” Ice cream in hand and very excited, I head tent-ward. Tomorrow is the big day.





CHAPTER VII. Jura and Islay





I am at the Tayvallich dock at 7:30am. Nobody is getting my spot on that boat. Bored by 8:00am, I wander over to the café for breakfast and see a piece of paper with “Weather Report” on it. It is a parody of the kind of forecast BBC puts out daily: Overcast with sun coming out then light rains turning to full gale with winds up to 60 miles per hour followed by sun and then intermittent rain. When I go to pay, I see a date and time stamp with the words “BBC Weather Service.” Oh oh. Unless this ferry ride is quick, we are in terrible trouble.

Most people get to Jura on the CalMac ferry from Kennacraig (outside Tarbert) to Port Askaig (Isle of Islay). From there, a short ferry crosses to Jura. Cars and trucks can use this route. Passenger only traffic can opt for the same route or this alternative out of Tayvallich. The Tayvallich trip is much shorter, although exciting given a twelve passenger boat bounces around considerably more than a 5,000 ton ship. The ferry arrives and, of course, everyone is allowed on before me. My bike ends up in the back, lashed to nothing. I crawl into the crowded cabin and find the only empty seat. The first order of business is to hand each of us a lifejacket, not the cheap foamy ones, either, but the fancy, shmancy commercial ones that self-inflate. How cool. The Captain tells us to put them on. Say what? I have never been told to put on my life jacket before departure.

I ask the woman next to me if there have been any recent “events.” She laughs a nervous, hysterical, laugh but says nothing. Since the life jackets are mostly straps, including a harness meant to go between your legs, everyone puts theirs on incorrectly. The Captain does not mind since his is fastened correctly. I ask the Captain if they are trying to tell us something. With a glimmering eye, he says: “Gets rough out there.” It does? He then launches into the Monday story, three days ago, involving waves, vomit, and green people. I remember the “Don’t ride with us if you have neck and back problems,” tighten my straps and try to use the remaining strap ends to lash myself to the seat.

The boat is a Stormforce 11, built for offshore use. We depart with a large Vroom that continues for the next fifty minutes. The Captain must have heard about me because he tells me it is OK to go outside and not darken the door of his cabin anymore. I do. It is lovely. The best preventative medicine for seasickness is fresh air, of which there is plenty as we race down Loch Sween past that blight of a holiday park and out into the Sound of Jura. We fly by several small islands, including one with the small island chapels I spied the other day. The winds abate. The sun blazes down. A sailboat glides by. We have a flat crossing. The Captain says this is unheard of.

As Jura gets closer, it looks more wild and remote. On schedule, we arrive at the Craighouse pontoon where I extricate myself from that spider’s web of a life jacket, drag my bike up the small ramp, and head to the camp site, which is part of the Jura Hotel. The hotel has a tent ground in front, a lovely stretch of grass on the water with unparalleled views of Knapland. Lovely though it is, it is totally exposed to the elements. Given the forecast from hell, I run up to the hotel to ask for a room. That’s 100kph winds they are predicting. The Jura Hotel does indeed have a room for me. Tomorrow. Feeling like one of the condemned, I slouch back to the grass. A corner with trees and a rock wall looks like it might provide some protection from a south-west wind. It’s the tent for tonight.

The storm begins. The winds howl. The rains come down. I do not notice a thing. I got damn lucky parking my tent in its little corner because I am completely protected. Not so the people who put their tent right out in the open. When I wake up after my blissful night’s sleep, I am stunned at the carnage in front of me, straight out of The Perfect Storm. My neighbours’ shredded tent looks like a multitude of flapping Buddhist prayer cloths. It is getting worse. I wrestle my sleeping bag back into its stuff sack then roll my tent into a wet ball since trying to package it up in 100kph gale is going to turn me into a kite sailor.

The Jura Hotel is nonplussed that I look like the Ancient Mariner and takes me to my tidy room with its foot thick stone walls and double glazing. Since anything else I could do outside would be life threatening, it is a great day for a whiskey tour. If I get sick after sampling the product, I have a comfortable place across the street in which to be so. I ruck up at Jura Whiskey Distillery. The distillery tour areas are closed for cleaning. Because of this and there is only me, my tour will be free. The world renowned Jura Distillery usually charges for the tours to put a damper on the freeloaders. I get a whole hour tutorial from Danielle who is proud of what she does. She is very informative and forthcoming. In my continued obsession with public infrastructure, I ask if they treat the water before they do the first mix. Danielle says, “No.” She adds that someone does a weekly check of the stream feeding the distillery to make sure a deer hasn’t died in it.

I am afraid to ask the hotel where their water comes from, because I don’t see any water treatment plant on this island of 200. As for wastewater, what are all those long pipes going from crofts (and hotels) into the sea? When I ask Danielle about the distillery’s wastewater, which admittedly is less biologically contaminated than human waste, she tells me they have a pipe that goes a LONG way out. I am not comforted.

I also am not going swimming. Neither is anyone else. I have as yet to put my toe in the water. I have not done this for two reasons. First, I have seen only twelve people swimming this entire trip. Every one of them had on a wet suit. Second, every person I have seen who works at or is on the water (yachtsmen, fishermen, ferrymen, casual labourers), every one of them has their self-inflating life vest on all the time. This means, the water is so cold that when you fall in you have less than four minutes of life left. I am saving my toes for a fate other than death by hypothermia.

Back to the distillery. Danielle pours me a tiny sip of their ten year old single malt. I could have had more but am becoming Scottish in frugality and ask for a tiny serve. I have never had whiskey before let alone the vaunted single malt. In fact, I rarely drink hard liquor and, even then, only when it is mightily mixed with something else. This is due to a fateful evening in the Virgin Islands forty-five years ago at a place called the Sandbox which I remember to this day because I never knew a room could whirl around at such speed and that you could get on a plane the next day, fly four hours in the aftermath, and not die or have permanent brain damage.

I am afraid I might hurl the ten year old whiskey right up. I taste it. It is interesting. Then Danielle pours me a sip of Prophecy. Exquisite. It is Jura in a glass. I have never had anything like it. Neither has my stomach. It is 11am. My stomach and I are at odds as to whether this is a good idea, but I am enough in favour that I buy a small bottle to bring home and sniff.

That night I have a dinner of squat lobster. This is an unknown seafood, one of many I will discover on this trip. It looks like a miniature lobster with a chubby tail. The waiter tells me it used to be a by-catch, what they would throw from the nets back into the sea. Then someone clever thought, maybe tourists will eat it! Only the tails, shell on, appear in a big bowl. They are delicious. More so as I look out the window and watch the waves come over the islands, the breakwaters, the navigational lights, with a height and ferocity that would be terrifying if I weren’t hunkered down in a stone building that has lasted for centuries.

The ferries are cancelled for two days. Both of them. I listen to the winds howl and understand why these people live in stone houses with rocks on the roof. I am SO glad I am not camping.

Jura is 367 kmsq in area and forty two kilometres long. With 200 residents, that is 1.8 kmsq per resident. A great place to be alone. The road network consists of a road from Feolin Ferry on the west along the southern coast up to Craighouse then north along the east coast to Inverlussa. The OS map also shows a further road north, turning into a dirt track past Barnhill and ending at Kinuachdrachd. A further 2.5+ kilometre hike will take you to Jura’s northernmost point. Why would you want to go there? Two reasons. Barnhill is where George Orwell wrote much of 1984. I am having trouble figuring out how to get to Barnhill in these modern times. How tubercular ridden Orwell arrived and survived for a year mystifies. Barnhill is still available for holiday lets at £1,000 a week, complete with coal and generator.

My interest, however, is in the northern end of Jura where on a good day one can overlook the Corryvreckan Whirlpool. Third largest on earth, the whirlpool’s formation is tide and weather dependent. On truly exciting days the standing waves can be nine metres high and the roar heard sixteen kilometres away. My difficulty is that riding all the way there is going to take longer than I have, with no assurance I will see anything other than a tidal race. A formidable one at 16kph, but nothing exciting viewed from a high cliff.

To this point, my excitement on Jura has been daily ramblings to the Community Store which is incredibly well stocked, with helpful volunteers. It also houses the Post Office. I arrived first day at 1:15 pm. The Post Office closed at 12:00. Oh well. As I moved two metres from the Post Office counter to the shop counter, the woman at the till asked if I needed something at the PO. I mentioned my “Ship to Self Package” but told her tomorrow would be fine. Not here! She turned around, stepped one metre into the PO, asked my name, and made Christmas and comfort happen once again. Then we had a conversation about island life and how Jura is so active, with everyone pitching in. For example, the community hosts the Isle of Jura Fell Race, a twenty-eight kilometres off road foot race that summits seven mountains including the Paps of Jura. A smaller road race is scheduled soon. I am finally starting to understand that people who live on these islands WANT to live on these islands. They are prepared to invest a lot to sustain their way of life. The place is awash in community pride. I am very welcome here, becoming part of the local fabric of life ever so quickly.

My last full day on Jura involves cycling as far north as I can get in one day without dying. This is, twenty-five kilometres to Inverlussa and back again. It is a challenging ride with elevation changes. At one point the road clings perilously to a cliff, its guardrail slumping over the edge at a forty-five degree angle, soon to be washed downhill. The view is heart stoppingly beautiful. It takes twice as long to get to Inverlussa because I halt every five minutes, just to sit and look at the scenery. Not only has the rain stopped. The sun is out. Today is the smaller ten kilometre road race. I trade waves with drivers headed out to set up water stops. From high along the eastern side of Jura, I look over the Sound back to Knapland feeling eagle-like at this height.

Inverlussa is a beach with two houses. A dog otter (large male) has been sighted here, and my otter quest continues. During this trip, people keep telling me to go to this beach or that. With rare exceptions, the beaches do not measure up to those in Western Australia, where I live. Inverlussa turns out to be one that does. On the way to the beach, I pass red deer. Red deer shoots are a major source of income on the island. A large herd of red deer stands on the front lawn of the Ardlussa Estate. Inbreeding or does Ardulssa put food out for them so shooting guests can bag their deer from the bedroom window? The deer certainly are not afraid of me or my bike. Their antler racks are quite spectacular and dangerous. I pedal fast, pass a bus stop, and coast down the beach road.

The beach is a magical mix of scenery, river running into it, bridge, picturesque houses and – “Tea on the Beach.” I had heard about this but had no idea what to expect. Tea on the Beach is a table and several insulated bags that include hot water, cakes, tea cups and pots, and everything you need to make yourself tea. Someone just does this. It is so unexpected and a wonderful touch, particularly after that ride. The wind is still howling. I find a nook to hide in and, watching for the dog otter that never appears, select a lovely piece of lemon drizzle cake from the five offerings and make hot tea. I leave a donation and small note to say how much I appreciate it, because I do. I was not looking forward to the long ride back but warmed and sugared up, my enthusiasm returns. Off into that south-westerly head wind. It is so beautiful I don’t care. It is one of the best rides of the trip. The lemon drizzle cake was tops, too.

If I were more clever, I would have realised that the “bus stop” sign I saw at Inverlussa was not a prank. Jura has a bus transport system. The bus meets the ferry at Feolin, taking passengers to Craighouse where they can continue on to Inverlussa, with return trips too. Given island people are low key and innovative, I bet they would have taken my bike and me from Craighouse to Feolin Ferry this morning. I will never know because I am still too wrapped up in the rules, regimentation, and way things work in big cities. There you ask for the unusual and are vilified. Here, you ask and the answer is: why not? Fifty per cent of those responses are augmented with: and have you thought of this because it will be cheaper, faster, and why don’t I just take you in my car? I don’t ask because I am sad. I don’t want to leave Jura. It was to be the magical highlight of my trip to date. It did not disappoint.

Now, I am off to Islay next door. Since the fiendish wind has reoriented 180 ° from yesterday, this involves a twelve kilometre ride into a raging headwind. My departure is preceded by a lively discussion amongst the hotel staff as to whether this has been the worst summer in twenty years or fifty.

As I leave Craighouse, I look up at Dubh Bheinn (530m) on whose southwestern slope is Loch á Bhaile-Mhargaidh that feeds the distillery. I see no deer bodies. Jura is strewn with Neolithic archaeology which I have not mentioned because I am becoming numb to it. The exception is at Camas an Staca where a 2.5 standing stone juts out from the landscape. The path to it is through bracken, wet, and unmarked. My melancholy state takes me onward. The road slopes downhill, then follows a shingle beach past an old stone bridge to Feolin. A dirt track continues past Feolin up the west coast of Jura for a way. Most of the west coast, though, is uninhabited and accessible only by foot. The rains are threatening but have kept at bay for this entire slog. The wind has not abated. I board the tiny ferry and cross to Port Askaig on Islay. Islay couldn’t be more different.

Islay has eight to eleven whiskey distilleries including some of the most famous: Laphraoig, Langevulin, Bruichladdich, Bowmore, and Ardbeg. The number variation is due to some distilleries not catering to tourists, because if one can’t sample your wares, why would you count? The primary activity on Islay is taking whiskey tours, trying to get drunk for free, and recovering overnight to do it all again. The unaware are surprised to discover that the distilleries are wise to this and charge £5 - £10 for 2 - 3 dram tasting. A dram is 3.69ml Imperial in the measured system. Not very much. Most tourists do not know this. Many expect a really good glug. They are sometimes disappointed. To assuage their disappointment, or perhaps because they are on tour number five of the day and feeling the effect, they buy bottles of the stuff at the gift shop as they reel out the door.

Those who sign on for guided “Whiskey Tours” have the opportunity to be toted around by bus with a handler, stay at a B&B, and pay upwards of £600 for the four day privilege. Whilst Islay is twice the size of Jura, it is more densely populated with 3,200 residents. A tourist population of 55,000 descends upon them all in the summer. Port Askaig is crawling with these people and the transport that serves them. Islay has a whole different feel, even standing here at the ferry stop. It does not appeal. I enter the ferry shop to buy food for tonight. The shop is 10% food, and 90% tchotchkes. The antiquated pub alongside the ferry looks like a place to partially drown my sorrows. Filled with the loud and noisy ones, it loses its charm very quickly. I opt for riding the bike up the straight hill out of Port Askaig and heading south. The destination is “first place I can find a bed” because I am sick of this relentless wind. Worst case destination is Port Mòr Campsite, council run and a long way away.

So far the only good thing about Islay is the view of Jura. The hill out of Port Askaig is a killer but once on top, the topography is rolling and flat. Even lush. This looks like a place people would have settled and thrived, which they did. This is where, at Finlaggan, the Lords of the Isles held court. You may remember the land trading back on Kintyre, with Magnus the Barefoot and the King of Scotland. What Magnus, the King, their successors, and other interlopers were trading was not necessarily “their” land but the dominion of the Lord of the Isles. The Lord of the Isles ignored them all. The various Lords through the centuries were revolving door vassals of Norway (Vikings), Ireland, and Scotland. For centuries the practicality of the remoteness and fragmentation of the Lords’ maritime dominion resulted in the Lords being functionally independent. When put upon, they were ferocious. This explains why various kings were happy to give away the Lords’ lands. Watching the recipients trying to collect would be entertaining indeed.

The Lords’ territories included the Hebrides, Knoydart, Ardnamurchan, the Kintyre peninsula, and occasionally Ross and Skye. This territory consists of hundreds of islands, most tiny but many not, and ranged from the Isle of Lewis south to the Isle of Man. The Lords called councils attended by men who sailed from these far flung lands to meet at Finlaggan. These men would have sailed hundreds of kilometres in small wooden boats with no self-inflating life vests. How did they get the message to attend? How did they survive these perilous seas (and this horrible wind)? I wheel into Finlaggan and find the tiny visitor centre closed. A path leads to a small island and the remains of the castle. The fate of losers in Scotland is not kind.

In 1493 John Macdonald II, then Lord of the Isles, forfeited his estates and titles to James IV of Scotland (Prince Charles is now the current Lord). The castle fell to ruin which it remains today although helpful signs indicate the purpose of each foundation. The Finlaggan Trust came into being only in 1984 to protect the site, the importance of which the Trust celebrates with such unusual events as the “500th Anniversary of the Forfeiture of the Lordship.” The Trust also has licensed the site for weddings and displays on its “Weddings” site a picture of newlyweds, one of whom in full kilt (and in full wind) leaves no doubt as to what is worn underneath. Finlaggan is pretty but I find, like other sites I have visited, it has an aura. This one is resoundingly depressing. I watch fly fishing on Loch Finlaggan and a large flock of sheep clogging up the access road while I quietly pray that a B&B is in my future.

It is. I stop at the Ballygrant Hotel only three kilometres from Finlaggan. If there were a Scottish equivalent of the theme from “Deliverance,” it would be playing here. I meet Dad and Son who, after some disappearance and machinations, tell me there is no room, but I am welcome to sit in the bar and drink whiskey. Several more kilometres at Bridgend is an actual B&B. I bang on the door. No one answers. On the last series of bangs the door flies open. I enter and yell. Nothing. After twenty minutes and with the weather looking inauspicious, I give up and head west. I ride around Loch Indaal, a sea loch aligned perfectly with the raging south-westerly wind. The traffic here is less than it was between Port Askaig and Bridgend, but the wind blows me all over the road, providing excitement for me and the oncoming tourists.

I pass Bruichladdich distillery surrounded by B&B’s. Sitting outside on chairs and benches are people who look to have had an inebriating day. In Fort Charlotte I am so tired that when I find a Youth Hostel, I stand outside, look at it and decide I just do not have the energy to go in and be disappointed one more time. The one thing about campgrounds: I have never been turned away. The campground is only down the road. On my last legs I make it to the Port Mòr Campsite and find Nirvana.

Council run campsites to date have been – top notch! All of them make an effort to please. The result is not always consistent, but they are always welcoming. More often than not, they are a step above privately run campgrounds. This one is terrific for a number of reasons: the staff, the laundry, and the onsite bistro in a nice new building with lots of space. I can hang out, read my book, and have macaroni and cheese, served with the usual chips, until my cholesterol level blocks all arteries. I am allowed to pitch my tent “anywhere.” Unlike the Jura Hotel, this site has NO protection. I set up next to the boundary fence with the logic that if the wind uproots the tent, we both will blow into the barb wired fence, preferable to being blown into Port Charlotte like tumbleweed. The view from my tent is over the Atlantic towards Northern Ireland, infinitely closer than either the Isles of Lewis or Man. The wind creates a loud flapping sound that makes a sound sleep impossible, if you aren’t exhausted and full of fat. I sleep the sleep of the dead.

Even though I am well rested, my enthusiasm is damp. I will be damper if I go out in this because the deluge has started, blowing horizontally. The weather report is for 40 - 50 kilometre winds, a far cry from 100 kilometres but a questionable task for my little tent. We haven’t really tried out an unprotected gale. If I sit in just the right place in the nice warm café, I can see my tent and decide whether there is need for intervention. Today is a day to drink tea, read my book, and do housekeeping.

Oh oh. What is happening to my tent? Well, to its credit it has not blown away. However, it is raised off the ground to the length of its little tent peg tethers. I rainsuit up and find the reserve tent bag with extra rope and pegs. Hoping this is fixable, I anchor half the emergency tie downs. I am too lazy to anchor the other half. I spend the rest of the day reading in the lovely café, doing my laundry which is a monumentally stinky load, and occasionally glancing at the tent to make sure it doesn’t get airborne.

This trip has settled into a couple of focal points. One is the weather, which drives some of the decisions about where I stay for the night. Two, is the laundry. There are no launderettes in Scotland. I don’t know what these people do. Do they all go to Lochgilphead? You can find a washing machine at many campgrounds and no place else. So if I am out of clothes that moves camping to a higher priority over, say, a warm cosy hotel.

Third is underwear. While this is technically laundry, it is a special category. Don’t let anyone tell you that you can ride a bike all day, hand wash your knickers, and that is going to work. Not unless you carry a giant container of bleach with you, it is not. Then, some knickers do not work for cycling. I hate cycle shorts because it feels like you have the Sunday Times jammed in your pants. Try hand washing those things. The result is a wet crotch the next morning. I am experimenting with other options. I learn that women’s knickers are designed by misogynistic sadists: how can we precisely align the seams on women’s underwear so that they chafe the tender bits and women won’t take up cycling? How about we design the leg openings with thin elastic garrottes to sever the leg? I have now gone through three of the five pairs I brought. They are useless. My other two pairs I will not exactly go into, but they look just like men’s boxers. (Because they ARE men’s boxers.) One pair was designed by a company that said: how do we design a pair of men’s boxers in such a way that Boyo here doesn’t feel unmanned? Should we double and triple up on the front part to give him some swagger? That pair hasn’t worked very well, either, because it feels like a sanitary pad.

The one pair that has worked has only a slight version of the previous problem. It is also lighter and dries quickly. The manufacturer has saturated the fabric with antimicrobial chemicals so these do not smell most of the time. This is the only pair that approaches hand washing acceptability, and it does not chafe or rub anywhere. Sadly, I only have one pair and it is getting overtime use. There is a point at which hand washing just hasn’t been able to keep up. A proper washing machine is required which drives all kinds of decisions about where I go and where I stay. I also spend a good deal of time thinking about my next career being in knicker design and production.

These are the kind of things you think about when the wind is blowing, the rain is falling, you are grumpy and filled with mac and cheese (and chips). The little tent is champion. However this night, not exhausted, sleep is a bit of a dodge. It’s like being inside of a snare drum as the tent fills and snaps with every fifty kilometre gust.

Next morning the wind is still up. The charms of the onsite bistro are not entirely making up for the lack of same on Islay. I am really cranky. I have covered half of Islay and the highlight has been the mac and cheese. I feel I have not given the place a fair chance because maybe the other half will make amends. Getting there means the ride of death. The ferries that land on Islay are large. The ferry traffic is voluminous to which is added giant articulated lorries hauling whiskey here and there. Thanks again to the council and its transport, I walk to the bus stop across the street from the campground and continue on routes that will take me to Bowmore, Islay’s centre of the commercial universe and home of a distillery of the same name, then down to Port Ellen and east to Laphroaig, Lagavullin, and Ardbeg, the centre of the whiskey tourist universe.

It’s always different to see, from the window of a warm, wind free bus, where I have ridden. If I had taken a left instead of a right at Bridgend I would have found a nifty store and hotel (which would have had no room anyway). Bowmore further along is busy but focused on the visitors. I change buses, pass the Islay Airport, a big hotel/golf complex, roar through Port Ellen, and watch three distilleries go by. The pedestrian traffic here is voluminous, requiring a large pedestrian way linking these three distilleries. I could be in a downtown urban centre given the industrial distilleries and quantity of people. I can’t bear to get off the bus and wait until we turn around, heading back the way we came. I have now seen all of Islay. I have seen enough.

Next morning, I pack up, and zoom back to Port Askaig which truly is a zoom with the wind howling at my back. I toy with the idea of crossing over to Jura, kissing its soil, and putting up a tent for the night since the ferry to Colonsay is early the next day. I sit, have a beer at the pub, and sit some more. I approach the barmaid and ask about a room. As luck would have it, there is one. At night, the tourists depart and the Port Askaig Hotel asserts more of its historic, local character. I can see Jura across the Sound as quiet descends. Here is the one truly charming place I have been on Islay. Perhaps my reward for deciding to leave?





CHAPTER VIII. Colonsay





The early morning ferry from Islay to Colonsay leaves in bright sunlight. We head north on the Sound of Islay straining against the tidal race. I focus on Jura. Behind me, on Islay, we are passing another industrial distillery at Bunnahabhain. The view of Jura is a dramatic mix of the Paps of Jura and intricate coastline with sea arches, raised beaches, waterfalls, rocky shores, and unspoiled wilderness. My heart is tugged back there as I flee the touropolis of Islay. The one hour trip retains, for its entirety, Jura on the horizon and me drawn to it.

In contrast, my first glance of Colonsay is disappointing. Houses stuck on a windswept rock. I disembark and find the local tearoom, the Colonsay Pantry. Small, it is full of community people giving a nice rambunctious feeling that continues to build throughout my stay. The Pantry advertises a “Fresh Fish Night Wednesday.” It is Wednesday. What the heck. I make a booking. The owner asks if I mind sitting with other people. I request only that they be locals. Maybe I will learn something. Then off to the Colonsay Estate Backpackers Lodge, touted as being only four kilometres away. It is, with the first two kilometres straight up. The ride back from tonight’s seafood dinner with a full stomach is going to be interesting.

The lodge is the estate’s old gamekeeper’s house, set amongst trees, fields, and long views. I meet some interesting fellow travellers. I am assigned a room all to myself. I head back down to the post office to find YES another box and NO you can’t walk over to the island of Oronsay because it is a neap tide. Oronsay is a small island transiently connected to Colonsay. Once there was an abbey on Oronsay with a vibrant religious community and links to Iona, about which more later. Remaining now are a Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) Reserve, an especially fine stone cross, and medieval gravestones. The Oronsay visit was meant to be a trip highlight. However, the only way to get to Oronsay is to walk across a two mile strand when the tide is out. It takes three hours to get there, see things, and get back. In a neap tide you get less than two hours, barely enough to get over and back...or you drown. I am eternally grateful to the postman for telling me about the neap tide because I would have been another statistic, if they even count tourist deaths from stupidity.

Back at the lodge, I share this disappointment with my lodge mates. They walked out earlier in the week. She insists on sharing her photos of their “spectacular” visit. This does not make up for it nor, next day, does my ride to the end of the Oronsay road where I longingly look across the strand with its knee deep water, knowing I am forever denied.

That night, I ride back to the Pantry for the seafood dinner and sit down with Liz and Duncan, mother and son and long term island residents. These very lovely people propel me to a different island life and one that I want to be part of. They become my personal tour guides and tell me about history, culture, and hidden gems I can find all over the island. They talk about the ceilidhs, quiz nights, and other activities that sound like non-stop fun. There are all of twenty seats in the Pantry. All are taken except four at one table. Four late arrivals come in. There are great hugs and kisses all around, including when the newcomers come up to my table.

Don’t I know that woman? I think I have seen her naked. Indeed I have. It is a very famous A+ list actress who has been coming to Colonsay for decades and who is great friends with my table mates. I try not to stare in deference to the local custom, but I am trying to remember the movie. It was in Milan. She had a younger lover. She had a broad butt which would indicate she had children. Hey, wait. Isn’t that her son standing next to her? This is all so very, very wrong. I am praying for stunt double to soothe my rampaging mind.

Dinner finally starts. The meal is scary good and a total distraction (Thank God). I don’t imagine I will eat another langoustine again except here because these are so fresh. I saw them wheeled from the boat to the Pantry forty-five minutes ago. Everyone is abuzz. Everyone knows everyone. I am included which is unexpected and changes my initial impressions totally. Liz tells me tomorrow night is Quiz Night at the pub and if I can get myself there, she will drive me back to the lodge (which is entirely on the other end of the island from where she lives). I do not make it to Quiz Night but learn later that it was packed out and involved lots of beer and fun yelling. I wish I had made the effort.

Next day I ride half the island, which isn’t far but very pretty. Colonsay is on the same latitude as northern Canada. It’s no surprise that Colonsay’s west coast is rocky and carved, the ocean roiling. The surprise is that it is so warm. The Gulf Stream runs right past here and tempers the climate. The Kilmartin House Museum has a small local display. Then it’s on past the airfield and rugby pitch, a patch of grass so designated to accommodate the annual rugby tournament. Next, down the Oronsay Road past the small ruin where the monks hunkered down while waiting for the tides to change. A stop at a holiday let where the family tells me they come annually. This year was a big year because the twelve year old daughter jumped off the dolphins (piers) into the harbour, no mean feat given the height and the water temperature. She beams proudly having joined the island youth in a totally illegal initiation right. Past the estate owned pub and into the community shop for supplies. On to the Colonsay Brewery, Colonsay Bookshop, and Wild Thyme Spirits (gin). The sign for the next ceilidh is up at the community centre. The shop is busy and includes a used book exchange. I load up and head back.

My last stop, right down the treed lane from the lodge, is the “Cake Lady.” Open her front door and you find several trays filled with cupcakes. Leave £1 in the honesty box and you can take one home with you. I return to the lodge with three: orange, cardamom, and coconut, all delicious. My new friends, they of the Oronsay photos, have moved on. Replacing them is a rugby team. I somehow missed that the annual rugby match is this week. One entire team has decided to stay at the backpackers. I meet my new roommate, Andrew. Andrew seems like a nice lad of about twenty-eight. He must have drawn the short straw having to room with me, but that is not my problem. The boys are noisy and silly but what else would one expect? They all clean up and go out for Quiz Night at the pub.

They come back at 1am yelling, howling, and making all kinds of noise. At 5am, Andrew gets up and takes all the coat hangers out of the closet and throws them on the floor. He wanders around the room, finds a bottle and proceeds to pee into it. I cannot exactly be sure of what is going on except for the one thing of which I am absolutely certain: his bare ass is a metre from my face. I am worried that he is peeing on my panniers. When I figure out that is not what is going on, I just go back to sleep. Seen this all before. Though at my advanced years, wasn’t expecting to see it again.

The boys are wildly apologetic next day. They thought I left in a huff. However, I had just moved my stuff to the next door bothy because that was the only place the Estate had available when I booked for today, so I was commanded to move. We chat. We are all friends. I ride off to investigate the other half of the island, including the Colonsay Estate garden and tea room with the Cake Lady herself serving the tea and huge slabs of her cake. In the garden is one particularly charming 8th or 9th century stone cross carved with a human face. It was heisted by the Estate from its original location to protect it from being heisted by someone else. The privileges of rank. I also ride off to a highly recommended beach that is not Inverlussa Beach, but close. I am hopeful that tonight will be better, mainly because the boys can’t possibly drink themselves into a stupor two nights in a row before a series of rugby matches, can they?

They do! They come home at 1am all loud and noisy, this time with music. And at 3am I am woken by a naked man standing in my room and trying to get into the upper berth of my bunk. Good thing he wasn’t trying to get into MY bunk, or he would have the thing which identified him as a naked man being gift wrapped for him. I chase him out and go back to sleep. Next morning I reflect on how the only reaction I have had to all these goings on is to yell, PISS OFF SO I CAN SLEEP. Today I do leave, not necessarily in a huff. However, I speculate that the people who own the estate (and the backpackers) have NO idea what is going on.

I share with them. Their first response is to give me a refund (for which I did not ask). The second is to tell me how sorry they are and that they had NO idea. The third is to detail how they intend to deal with it. The woman who tells me this leaves no question in my mind that she is now marching down to the Colonsay Pantry or Colonsay Pub to find every member of the Rugby Committee and give them an earful. The island has only 135 residents. I wouldn’t want to be on the Rugby Committee. They have no place to hide. The story of the naked rugby players is going to travel faster than the speed of light in this close knit community. My work here is done. On to the mainland and Oban.





CHAPTER IX. Oban





The ferry from Colonsay to Oban leaves in the afternoon, meaning I have lots of time to mooch around downtown, all four buildings of it, and say goodbye. This is such a friendly place, a hive of activity. A sense of community sums up life on these Inner Hebridean islands. Instead of the remote, desolate, soul destroying existence I had imagined, I find thriving happy campers. The ferry up to Oban is mind numbingly beautiful and follows the northern coast of Jura, Scarba, the Gulf of Corryvreckan, and the Garvellachs, islands which even today are hard to get to but hold the remains of a substantial 6th century monastery. The Firth of Lorn, separating the Isle of Mull from the mainland, is attractive to yachters because of the multitudinous anchorages. The sailing is a challenge with the tides and precipitously changing weather, both unforgiving of poor navigational skills. We head up through the Sound of Kerrera and disembark, on a beautiful day, in a place that has vague remembrances. The abandoned, neo-concrete, bowling alley looming over the foreshore is not one of them.

I was in Oban thirty-five years ago. For whatever insane reason, I decided to do a three week bike trip of the Outer Hebrides. As you know, it was a trip I have never forgotten and the impetus for this one. I haven’t forgotten Oban, either. Back then, Oban seemed a rural outpost with a strong, vital link to the Outer Hebrides. I loved Oban. I am afraid it might have changed. It has. It has taken on a very large touristy component, but the small town feel continues to assert itself. Oban remains a hub of serious enterprise. The island connection has only strengthened, as evidenced by the sparkling CalMac terminal and the new ships docked at it, all built since my first trip. Relieved that Oban has not suffered Islay’s fate, I plan to stay and do day trips. Additionally, I must make some decisions about where I am going. I desperately want to see the Hebrides, West Coast, and Highlands. I also long to see the Great Glen, Loch Ness, the Orkney Islands, and the Shetlands. No routing sensibly accomplishes these two objectives. I opt for a route that will take me up the West Coast to Ullapool, the Outer Hebrides, on to Durness and Cape Wrath, the most north westerly point of Scotland. That accomplished, I can someday backtrack to Oban, pick up any missed sights, and then travel through Morvern up to Fort William, the Great Glen, Inverness, and north all the way through the Orkneys to the Shetland Islands. It means I will need to come back to Oban again in the future. YIPPEE!

First, to the campground. The truth in advertising about lodging is dodgy here. Some places undersell themselves incredibly. At one, the owner put out homemade shortbread, offered to wash my laundry, and was my personal assistant for two days. In contrast, this campground advertises Wi-Fi, quiet, laundry, free kitchen, and a number of other facilities. Beware commercial campgrounds. These play to the caravan crowd from whom they get more money. Thus, your tent site is wherever they can’t put a caravan. Mine is on a slope with a twenty degree tilt. Kids and dogs run amok, morning til late. Wifi is available, but only in one tiny, unsheltered spot 250 metres from my tent. There is no mobile service.

I am here for two days before I see…THE SIGN. At one tap at the dishwashing sink (of the approximately forty taps in the campground) is a sign that says: TO THOSE USING THIS WATER SUPPLY (in these big letters). In inscrutable font 8 type below is the following:

The water in this supply is bacterially contaminated and not fit for human consumption. You should not:



-​Drink it



-​Brush your teeth with it



-​Shower with it



-​Wash dishes with it



I am at this tap because I filled my water bottle at another tap, took a walk, chugged the contents, and am here for a refill. In spite of the pronounced degradation in my personal hygiene, I have been brushing my teeth twice a day. I have had three showers, and my dishes are spotless. Spotless but covered with faecal coliform?

Now I know why my stomach was in an uproar this morning. I have dysentery. I have cholera. I have rabies. I have Hepatitis A, B, and C. (My sister the doctor is right now sorting out which of these is water borne so she can smarmily tell me the ones I was wrong about). I stare at the sign, absolutely amazed. This is not America. I would like to say it is not Australia, either, but every Department of Conservation (DEC) campsite in Western Australia has exactly the same sign on their water sources. DEC, however, does not hide the information but forthrightly posts it everywhere.

Scotland is supposed to be a first world country. Maybe the English were right. I was wondering when I was going to get to use my water purifying filter. Now I know. I retrieve it from my tent and fill up my water bottle. I deserve, at a minimum, a residence with potable water. I book a B&B and depart in a huff.

My new B&B home does not have a laundry, but it does have town water (presumably treated?) and a panoramic view of Oban Harbour. I arrive at 10am before check-in time, dump my bags, and head off to Kerrara. Kerrara is three kilometres plus a ten minute ferry ride from Oban. Even that close, Kerrara is totally undeveloped with only forty residents. When I was here before, I remember standing across from the island knowing that I could change the signal board and the ferryman would come. That seemed magical. Sadly thirty-five years ago the timing didn’t fit for a visit. This time it does. At the ferry landing, I slide the board, although the number of crossers has increased sufficiently in thirty-five years that now the ferry goes back and forth on the half hour.

Kerrara has no shops, no real roads and no real cars. A couple of beat-up vehicles roam the island but the roads are unfit for them. I am even struggling on the cycle, with deep ruts and regular gates. No worry because the scenery across the Sound of Kerrera is a picturesque distraction. I alternately walk and cycle along Kerrera’s east coast with its Horse Shoe bays, then turn sharply inland. At the top of a rise, a quad bike driven by an eight year old, Mum and baby brother on the back, roars by. The track heads down to Gylen Castle and the Kerrera Tea Garden and Bunkhouse. I had seen the Tea Garden advertised but was sceptical. In the middle of nowhere, here it is. A tearoom with tea, cakes, soups, sandwiches and just a lovely place. It’s like the family chose to live here and decided the way to make a living was for people to come to them. Come they do. Charming and welcoming, the Tea Garden is full.

I sit down across from a mother and young daughter who have come for a week from Edinburgh. The daughter is five. The mother is one of those earnest professional types who thinks going to a remote island, sleeping in a bunkhouse with strange adults, and “seeing nature” is exactly the kind of holiday a five year old wants. She is horrendously mistaken. The five year old is making us all pay. As a gob of sandwich flies by my head, I pick up my tea and cake and move tables, leaving the spot vacant for the unsuspecting walkers headed down the hill.

Oban offers so many opportunities. I can go inland. I can go seaward. In less than an hour I can be in wilderness. In no time, I can be in one of the biggest tourist attractions this side of Disneyland. Tomorrow I shall opt for the latter in the form of the “Three Islands Tour.” First I will go to the Isle of Iona. Iona was the centre of Gaelic Christianity for centuries. St Columba left Ireland and in the 6th century set up shop on this island from whence came unimaginable influence over the Christian world. I will then take a boat to Staffa. Staffa is an island with three volcanic layers, the middle being very unusual crystallised columnar basalt. It also has Fingal’s Cave and was the inspiration for Mendelson’s classic overture The Hebrides. I have always wanted to go there, but it is not an easy place to get to. My journey to both of these will cross the Isle of Mull. So will the journey of busloads of others.

Tourist trips here are, I find, peculiar. I go to the tourist ticket office with its volumes of tourist trips. I pick my “Three Islands Mull/Iona/Staffa” trip and pay. I receive a packet of tickets and a one page itinerary. Once you receive your tickets and itinerary, it is everyone for himself. The trip is self-guided – news to me. I discover I am taking public transportation to all these places, except Staffa. My immediate concern is that I just paid £60 for this trip. Best I can tell from looking at my itinerary is: (a) CalMac subsidised ferry to Isle of Mull, (b) Argyll and Bute subsidised bus to Iona Ferry, (c) CalMac subsidised ferry to Iona, (d) private boat to Staffa and back, and (e) return trips on the subsidised everything. With the return tickets to Mull and Iona at £10, the boat trip to Staffa £30, I may have been had. Then again, for me to string all this together and get the correct times would have taken hours and a lot of wine. I clear my brain of any rational thought, getting into the true tourist frame of mind, and prepare myself for being a human salmon.

Starting at 7am, our “tour” will take all day. I arrive salmon-like at the ferry terminal and stampede on with a herd of ticket and itinerary carrying Asians. I have noticed that Asian tourists are ubiquitous and diligent. (Lest you ponder whether you should call me a racist, I will just say I am so we can move on). The Asian tourists start at the crack of dawn and carry on sight-seeing until way past my bedtime. I have spoken to many who popped out of bed at 5am, did as many tours as possible in one day, went out to a nightclub, then came back for a brief sleep before doing it all again. Whether this is an enthusiasm for the place being visited or a burning need to get every penny’s worth remains a mystery. Fine with me since they keep the economy going. However, the general sense of personal space is somewhat different from mine, as is the omission of the queuing concept. As we load up, I flatten myself against the wall so I am not trampled and ponder the Scottish Government’s wisdom of subsidising the transport of the tourist industry. Pondering quickly changes to, “YIPPEE, ANOTHER FERRY RIDE.”

This one leaves Oban Harbour, one of the more interesting departures. The MV Isle of Mull is a very big ship (90 m long, 15.8m wide, and 4,719 gross tons). The navigable channel is less than 200 metres wide and sinuous. We pass Castle Dunollie, home of Clan MacDougall, at the north end of town. The 31st Clan Chief is a woman, Madam Morag MacDougall, having inherited from her aunt before her. The derelict state of the castle indicates that Clan MacDougall supported the Jacobites, since the dispossession of the Jacobite supporters was so complete after Culloden. We navigate the channel with many back, forths, and sideways, terrorising pleasure craft and tour boats while they assert their small boat maritime rights against this sluggish giant. We make it to the Firth of Lorn, passing a magnificent lighthouse on the islet of Eilean Musdile at the south end of the lightly populated Isle of Lismore. This lighthouse is an 1833 Robert Stevenson construction.

Not far from it is Lady’s Rock, hardly more than a sea-washed ledge, where one dark night Lachlan Maclean deposited Lady Katherine, his wife, and returned to Duart Castle on Mull, waiting for the changing tide to drown her. Next morning when he saw no sign of life, he informed the Earl of Argyll that Lady Katherine had died (of some cause other than murder, one presumes). The Earl gave permission to bury her at Inveraray Castle. Off went Lachlan with coffin and entourage. Upon arrival, he was invited in for refreshment and found at the head of the table, guess who? Neither the Earl nor his sister said a word during the meal. One imagines Lady Katherine, rescued by a passing boat, had enough to say to fill the conversational void.

Entering the Sound of Mull, we are only forty minutes into this tour, and I am beside myself. The loudspeaker tells us such exciting stories as we drink tea and eat more wonderful (not kidding) CalMac cafeteria food. I have a bacon roll as I watch everything described above go by, running intermittently to the opposite side of the ship to see Duart Castle and the Isle of Mull. The salmon people, me in their wake, depart in an agglutinated mass and head for the West Coast buses stacked in the nearby lot. The buses have numbers and no signs. Like salmon in a weir, people run in and out until everyone finds a seat that pleases them. An hour later some of my “Three Island Tour” mates find themselves mistakenly in Tobermory, but that is a pretty ride, too.

My bus is chock a block. We head west to Fionnphort where a ferry will take us to Iona. The Isle of Mull looked spectacular as I passed by on the Oban Ferry and continued to look spectacular from my Oban B&B. Big mountains jut out all over, including Ben More at 966m. Rising from sea level, the panorama of rugged, ragged, rocky landscape does things to people, including me. I would call it: awe. Our bus roars out of Craignure on a two lane road that lasts three kilometres before turning into a single track. We fly along at speeds that boggle. I keep creeping to the back of the bus, increasing my chances of survival when the inevitable head-on collision occurs. We climb alongside the Lussa River and enter Glen More. Here the road follows a valley floor, steep hills rising on both sides. From these hills pour tremendous waterfalls, flowing into streams, rivers, and lochs below. The relentless beauty does not end. If I rode this on my bike, I would be stopping every five minutes to take it all in.

We pass a cyclist and my heart goes out to him because death is only a millimetre away. We leave Glen More, rocketing along the southern end of Loch Scridain, a sea loch. I can see a house or two on the other side, looking lonely. Our road is punctuated by small hamlets where the bus, being the people's transportation, picks up an occasion local. The hills flatten out, the sea looks grey and not very inviting. We disgorge en masse at Fionnphort. Fionnphort consists of a visitor centre, food vans, toilets and a ferry to which I am carried by the other salmon around me. We are herded on, take the short trip to Iona, and for the first time on this entire “tour” are given instructions: do not miss your ferry back to Fionnphort or Staffa will be scratched from your itinerary. We are given these instructions enough times that the message resonates with everyone, meaning the time on Iona is short and precious. I feel as though I am part of a cartoon mob that runs from place to place, sticking heads inside buildings briefly as we go.

Iona may represent centuries of Christianity, but I am not feeling the joy. The island is crawling with people. Most of what is on Iona is directed at them. Food shops. Souvenir shops. Pubs. Lodging. Rumour has it that if you stay for the night, the spirituality of the place envelopes you. It must have enveloped St Columba because he dawdled in these waters and on the Inner Hebridean islands for a while before putting down roots at Iona. The attraction may have been that the island is small enough to provide privacy but large enough to support agriculture. Iona is much smaller than Colonsay but has a population 50% larger, employed supporting the tourists. I wander through the remains of a 13th century nunnery and proceed on to the restored Abbey. In front of it are St Martin’s Cross, a five metre high 8th century medieval stone Celtic cross, ornately carved. A replica of St John’s Cross, the original shattered, adjoins it. The Abbey itself seems less religious than attraction, which is not fair, but that is how I feel.

One captivating part of Iona’s history, and what drew me, is that the Book of Kells may have been written and illuminated here at the end of the 8th century. This magnificent manuscript is now housed at Trinity College in Dublin. The Book of Kells was shifted around Scotland and finally to Ireland because of the Vikings. In the 10th century, they sacked this centre of learning. Its influence diminished, rising again for a brief period before ruin prevailed. A cemetery holds the remains of many early Scottish kings, as well as kings from Ireland, Norway and France, testifying to the importance of the place. I wander through the cemetery briefly, never successfully connecting emotionally with anything, and scurry back to the ferry to make my escape.

Gloriously, the “Three Islands Tour” I am on is different from the “See Iona Tour.” I am going to Staffa while most of my salmon friends head back on the bus. Hooray. That is, hooray until I see the boat to Staffa. Think Jura Passenger Boat. The boat to Staffa is slightly larger, twenty passengers instead of twelve. The crew keeps counting us. This would be because (a) they like to count, or (b) they have lost an Asian tourist at some point in time and are slamming the barn door closed by counting everyone now? This is an open water crossing, Canada left, to a speck of an island. The water on Loch Scridain this morning was roiling.

As we leave the dock, the winds die. The seas are flat. I must be part Druid. Flat seas never happen. This has now happened six times. We roar out to Staffa. I see that although this is the island known for the columnar basalt, it is only one of many. If you haven’t seen columnar basalt before, think long, black, standing hexagonal tubes each wide enough to put your foot on. The theory is that slowly cooling lava allowed the basalt to crystallise, including on the surrounding islands I am looking at not too far away. Speculation also ties the same volcanic eruption with the Giant’s Steps in Northern Island less than 150 kilometres away.

Our first view of the geology is when the boat captain drives our tiny vessel right into the entrance of one of Staffa’s sea caves. The swell here is not flat. It is horrendous. We bob up and down, left and right, looking to crash against the cave wall any minute. Just at the point of impact, the engines reverse and carry us around the island to the dodgiest of quays. The boat continues to heave up and down. The crew expect us to leap onto a broken concrete landing. I have the agility of a dead tuna fish. The crew are ready to be rid of me because I screwed up their counting while I went to the loo and didn’t tell them. They counted to nineteen so many times that one of the passengers offered to be counted twice. The crew heaves me onto the concrete. Teetering on the quay edge, I gaze upon an Occupational Safety and Health nightmare.

I have two choices and, lucky me, I can do both if I survive the first. The choices are to climb up to the top of Staffa, cross to the other side, hang over the crumbling edge, and peer down on a puffin colony that might be there. Or not. The proper location of said colony is unmarked, meaning one gets to creep up to the crumbling edge, hang over, pray for puffins, and, if unlucky, crawl back and creep to another edge. A group of twitchers tears by me in hopes of being the first to see puffins (or die). My other choice is to go to Fingal’s Cave, formed entirely of hexagonal basalt columns. (It is acoustically a perfect place for musicians to perform, in which they have.) Either choice involves a rusty, derelict, cable hanging off a cliff wall.

I do not like heights, especially heights that may involve death. The first venture is twenty metres straight up a set of “sort of” stairs 20cm wide and 10cm deep with a handrail that is a moving cable. I discover it is a moving cable when, unbalanced, I grab what I think is a solid handrail and go flying. I am heading “up” to avoid the main hoard of shipmates who have run off to Fingal’s Cave. I climb to the top of Staffa, the twitchers run to the other side of the island, and I get to enjoy the view all by myself. Verra nice. The next activity is getting DOWN the stairs. This is more of a challenge. I expect to be a splat on the rocks at any moment, especially when a couple below decides to ascend when I am coming down. I growl at them. They back off.

Next is the walk to Fingal’s Cave. I use the term “walk” loosely. There is no path. Fainthearted, you step across the slimy, wet columnar basalt, akin to stepping on uneven raised pavers covered with grease, while holding onto another loose cable as the waves crash. Half this basalt hopping trip includes a gorge with a particularly fearsome race of water surging two metres high within it – and a single orange throw ring mounted on the wall. If you fell in, your best hope would be that the orange throw ring would knock you senseless. There is no hope of survival in that gorge without aide, which is not coming except to haul your dead body out of it.

I am glad I did not have a big breakfast. Keening a high pitched sound all the way, I get to Fingal’s Cave. I cannot bear to go in because the water is heaving there, too. I poke my head around the corner. It is terrific. Worth the trip out which was less terrifying than the trip back. I am exhausted from the amount of adrenaline that has coursed through my body in the last forty-five minutes. I hurl myself back on the boat, the start of the reverse trip back to Oban. I arrive in Oban exhausted, as most of my Asian salmon friends run down the gangway headed to the nightclub. For my part, I grab a chunk of fish and chips, return to my room, and wolf down everything else that is not tied down, including freeze dried blueberry cobbler. Terrified by the amount of campground bacteria that is infesting my gear, I sterilise my dishes and water bottles, have a shower, and collapse.

There is another campground in town. I decide to chance it. I make the owner swear that the water is potable, about which I later discover he has lied. (Only the HOT water is potable – the cold water is not. I learn this by reading another font 8 sign wedged in an obscure corner.)

I pitch my tent and go off to ride for the day. This time it is a route through Glen Lonan with more Neolithic stuff. Glen Lonan is right next to Oban, land of the ferry, train, major A road, and tourists. I ride for kilometres and kilometres, with many frequent stops, past standing stones, cairns, and a stone circle. For hours, I see no one. Glen Lonan is empty. If it weren’t so pretty, it would be eerie. This is another place where a sense of history and civilisation just oozes into my pores. Can’t explain it. For as soulless as Iona seemed to me, Glen Lonan is anything but. It has that shimmering aura of other Neolithic glens I have visited. A special feeling resonates in these places, much as my logical, organised mind would not like to accept it. At the height of land is a small loch with outflows on opposite ends. The ride down the other side of the Glen opens onto farmland and softer terrain. The final stretch is a glide into Taynuilt. Here I discover The Taynuilt, an old coaching inn. It serves food all day.

I get totally distracted on some of these rides, losing all track of time. As in, I had a bacon roll at 7:30 am this morning. It is now 2pm. I hadn’t noticed the passing time. I hadn’t eaten anything, either. Every neuron in my brain suddenly shuts off except the cluster that screams: FOOD, FOOD, FOOD. I see the menu. I order most of it. The waitress gapes. She heads to the kitchen and returns. She proudly announces, “The chef says if you eat all this he will give you a prize.” I imagine years later they will still be talking in the kitchen about that order. I didn’t finish it all but only just. Auspiciously, this restaurant is epicurean. First is a huge bowl of sweet potato/roast tomato soup which doesn’t sound particularly interesting but is exquisite, especially when I chuck huge chunks of bread and butter into it. There is bruschetta with mushrooms and garlic, but not just any mushrooms – a wide variety and lots of them. Next is goujons of hake. The fish is terrific, the pieces ungoujonlike and huge, all six of them. In a special metal basket comes a pile of chips. I leave only one. Beer washes it all down. (I am vaguely thinking a chocolate dessert is part of all this but my brain is so clogged with fat that I am now unsure.) As I fall out of my seat in a torpid heap onto the floor, I decide I will not ride back to Oban. Surely, there is a train?

There is. I am on the wrong platform when it arrives. In my defence, it is a one track railroad. What determines where you stand is whether the train coming in is going to have to wait for the other one. How would I know? Since another train is not coming for four hours, I am stressed out enough about not getting on this one that I suicidally run across the tracks, leap onto the opposite platform, and throw my bike into the passenger carriage. The conductor looks at me as though I were deranged. I flash my Senior Railcard at him. All is explained.

He orders me and my bike out of the passenger carriage, onto the platform. Speaking slowly, he walks me to the front car where the bicycle racks are. They are all empty. I weep with joy, hang up my bike, and flop into a seat. The conductor sternly tells me how lucky I am because bikes need a reservation, which I do not have. This train is usually full of bikes. Whatever kind spirit has been watching over me all day has made this train ride home the icing on the cake. I am discovering there is a lot you can get away with when people think you are old. I then reflect. I AM old. Back in Oban, I watch as a busload of tourists get off their coach bus, many of whom are considerably younger than me but members of the walking dead, and observe: maybe old isn’t a useful paradigm. My son once told me I was “vibrant,” which I thought was his very diplomatic way of telling me I was a lunatic, but for which I was grateful and to which I have clung. I think I will go with that.





CHAPTER X. Argyll





I can’t get the Corryvreckan Whirlpool out of my mind. I spy a boat trip that goes to it, but the trip leaves from the Isle of Seil to which I must cycle. I pack up my gear and leave early because the road out of Oban is a life-threatening A road complete with articulated lorries, coach buses, caravans, and annoyed locals. The road is up a steep hill meaning that unless a verge presents itself, my half-life will be measured in minutes.

The cycleway ends two metres out of town. The road does not have a verge. My safety is due to Scotland not waking up until 9am. It is also due to the cycle friendly native drivers, both commercial and residential. The further away I get from urban centres, the more cycle friendly drivers are. The weather is holding off. It is a long ride. I am just not into it. Part has to do with being panic stricken on a main road. Part is because there is no easy way for me to return other than the unsafe way I have come. I pass Loch Feochan, tidal with salmon pens, and turn off to follow a narrow road that is more life threatening than the A road because traffic, including the West Coast buses, is roaring up and down it. I can’t see the advertised standing stones from the road. I get to Clachan Bridge, known as the “Bridge Over the Atlantic” because it arches over a narrow waterway that connects the Atlantic Ocean north and south. It was here that islanders would change from the forbidden tartan before going onto the mainland in the days after Culloden. A tourist spot, nothing is open this early other than a post card shop. I want to go to the Isle of Luing, but I have a booking in Seil for the night, so that gets missed, too.

I am working up to a major crank when I finally arrive at Garragh Mhor, my B&B, hours before I am technically meant to check in. The owner greats me with a giant smile, takes my panniers, sits me down for tea and homemade shortbread, of which there is an unlimited supply, and runs through all the things to do, which turn out to be many. The small island across the way is Easdale, once the centre of the British slate industry. The ticket office for Seafari Adventures and the Corryvreckan tour is on the way to it. I head out the door to explore.

Incongruously, a huge building signed “Highland Arts Exhibition” is the first entertainment. Parked outside is a West Coast bus that, in my dreams, will spirit my bike and me back to Oban. The answer is: No. This pushes me right back to grumpy again. The “Highland Arts Exhibition” is suspect from the outside, with its series of deer antlers, terracotta birdbaths and statuary, unthematic window displays, complemented by picnic benches and a mini golf course across the entry road. I am not quite sure what to expect, but I know I do not want to go on a walk up that monstrous pile of slate rubble behind it, another suggested outing. In I go. No matter what I expected, it is here. Eclecticism to a degree never before encountered, from velour paintings, to animal bones, antiques, and actual pieces of art. There is so much of it I am here for an hour. The ice cream cups brighten me up. Sugar laden, I wander down to Seafari Adventures.

Seafari is full of tourists who are here for the same reason I am, but I booked my trip in Oban. Many of these folks did not think ahead, discover “no seats” for two days, and get surly. I have seen pictures of these boats. They are seats on a rubber platform, propelled by a jet engine. As I wander around the office looking at all the other promotional photos, I begin to reconsider this foolhardy idea. Would you go see the world’s third largest whirlpool in a boat slightly larger than your family car? The words “ticket scalping” come to mind. The churn at the counter is at such a fever pitch that I can’t elbow my way in to make an announcement about the unexpected availability of one seat. Someone behind the counter shouts, “BE AT THE DOCK AT 6. WEAR WARM CLOTHES.” I leave, wondering if the Highland Arts Exhibition sells rosary beads. Yes, it does. Any colour you want.

Across the way, the island of Easdale is calling, with its mini passenger ferry that crosses Easdale Sound. Easdale Sound is wide enough to throw a rock across. Its mainland proximity explains why there is a thriving community on this tiny island. Its historical claim is the slate quarries, with slate being shipped from here throughout Britain and adorning rooves worldwide. Until a major storm came through in 1881 and flooded all the quarries, ending the halcyon days of Easdale Slate. Used to sell for £2 a thousand weight. The recycled versions now sell for £2 per slate. End of an economy but not of a lifestyle.

The cottages are well maintained and filled with residents and many self-caterers. A pub on the island is a social centre. The island’s museum is manned by two helpful, welcoming volunteers. The exhibits cover the slate industry, army volunteers, education, public health, geology, boats, and entertainment. The museum also houses genealogical information and other historical documentation. Chock full of interesting things. I come away understanding the attraction of the place and why, on this island with only footpaths, people want to spend time here. I wait for the return ferry and head back to Garragh More where I am introduced to husband Steve.

Steve is one of the Seafari boat captains. Boat captains in general do not inspire confidence in me, unless they are the CalMac Captains in their white starched shirts with epaulettes. I know all the Seafari brochures emphasise their captains are very experienced. I have two words for that: Costa Concordia. Steve looks to be an independent spirit. Away from his neat, tidy, organised wife he may turn into a Wildman, especially on those jet propelled boats. My stomach knots as he explains what will happen that evening. I run into my room, eat more shortbread, and get onto the web to find an owner’s manual for the rosary beads.

I am at the dock at 5:30pm as are: other people, a huge pile of orange gear, and nobody that looks like a leader. A designated “helper” arrives and provides us with waterproofs and instructions on how to don them. This is serious foul weather gear. I am wise to this being the Atlantic and the water COLD. I have worn eight layers of fleece. The foul weather gear now surrounds it all. I can barely put my arms down by my sides. The finishing accessory is a lifejacket that is the old orange type but with major strapping to go everywhere, including between your legs. The “helper” checks us out and tugs all the straps tight. I now look like an orange Michelin Man. Two boats roar up the Sound of Easdale and make acrobatic turns into the dock. The stairs down the quay are narrow, steep, and slimy. No worry. If I tumble down, I will bounce the whole way and float corklike in the harbour.

Spoke too soon. There is a worry. This boat has no seats. Perched on the deck are twelve padded hobby horses, without heads, tails and legs. I am meant to straddle this and hang on to the stainless steel handhold that serves as an anti-jettison device when we crash into something. We are jammed sausage-like onto our horse, surrounded by the rubber ring that serves as the outer wall of the boat. Behind me are two Yamaha 300hp engines. This is like putting a formula one engine on a skateboard. Our captain is not Steve but another Wildman. He tells us that when the waves come into the boat, they will exit the back. We all turn around and see that this boat has no stern. We are going to the World’s Third Largest Whirlpool in this? My hands start scrabbling for a way through the life jacket and foul weather gear to fleece layer #6 with the pocket containing the rosary beads. Our captain slams the throttle on full. My hands abandon all spiritual hope and grab the rail as my head whiplashes back. We are going to die.

Part of this tour is meant to be a wildlife tour. My perspective is that it is “Wildlife meets the incredibly noisy boat tour.” Waterfowl flee our approach. With no wildlife to see, the captains decide to play with the boats and carve 180 degree turns that create a 3G Force. I am wondering where the loo is but, regardless, anything that comes up will exit out the stern-less back. Good thing, too, because there is no loo. Next is a game of chicken where each captain sees how close he can get to the next boat, at full throttle, before one of them peels off. It is a good long way to the Gulf of Corryvreckan, perhaps fifteen kilometres direct. We double the distance with the pirouettes, turns, and wave jumps. After twenty minutes of this it starts to feel amusement park ride-like as opposed to falling parachuteless from 10,000 metres-like.

We head south on the Sound of Luing, paralleling the island, and passing many smaller islands known as the Slate Islands because, they too, had quarries. One of them, Fladda, all 100m x 200m of it, did not have a quarry but sports an austere looking 1860 Stevenson lighthouse surrounded by a seawall. We race by Lunga before taking a vicious right turn into The Grey Dogs. The Grey Dogs is a tidal race in a 200 metre wide channel between Lunga and Scarba. Because the channel is narrow, with two small islands jammed in the middle, the captain tells us this stretch of water is unnavigable. WHAT ARE WE DOING HERE? The boat labours mightily into the outgoing tidal race. Ahead is a visible half metre wall of water created by the conflict between the ingoing and outgoing water. Our boats plough over the wall and makes it to the other side, where we promptly accelerate, perform a 180 degree turn, and fly out the other channel at full speed, leaping airborne off the water wall and landing with a resounding thump. Time to put on the Big Girl Pants and get into this. We haven’t died yet and even if the boat flips, I will bob along warm and toasty for hours before being sucked into the whirlpool.

The Corryvreckan beckons. We pass uninhabited Scarba with its 449m peak projecting right out of the water. As you recall, Jura is no slouch in the mountainous department, either. Located between Jura and Scarba, the Gulf of Corryvreckan has its own mountain, a submerged pyramid-shaped basalt pinnacle forty metres high. The narrowness of the channel between Scarba and Jura creates a major tidal race. Masses of fast water flowing over this submerged pinnacle produce all manner of strange effects including, during strong spring tides, the Corryvreckan Whirlpool. Which is ephemeral. We may see it. We may not. I am hopeful that we will NOT be seeing the nine metre standing waves that can occur. I am not even sure I want to see a giant whirlpool.

Our captain is strangely uncommunicative about what we will find. We wait. Our boat enters the Gulf and we see…absolutely nothing. We ride along the coast of Scarba seemingly hunting for something. I have been on fishing trips just like this. The boat goes here. The boat goes there. The fish go somewhere else. With a jerk, we roar over to a spot and see, a little whirlpool. It forms. Twinkling, it disappears. Our captain tells us sometimes they get bigger. Sometimes they disappear. My Big Girl Pants start to fall off when I think: and bigger would be how big? We zoom off to another little whirlpool, less than a metre wide. Then another. Then another.

Suddenly it looks as though a mythological creature has thrown a giant handful of diamonds on the water. Each diamond is a teeny tiny whirlpool. There are thousands of them. They form, sparkle, spin, and disappear. This goes on for a half hour, punctuated by rushes to other more substantial whirlpools, until the flow of the water changes and the whirlpools disappear for good. Our ride back to Easdale is just as fast but with less theatrics. The wildlife comes a bit closer. Everyone on the boat, including me, has been touched by nature’s magnificence. Except for the sound of the engines, it is dead quiet on the boat. The Fladda lighthouse blinks safe journey to us as we head back to Easdale and bed.

I am riding back to Oban. Fuelled by home-baked shortbread, the ride goes better than expected. It is before 9am and a turnoff at Kilmore takes me on a single track road along the River Nell, Loch Nell and Neolithic cairns into the back of Oban. My bike has some mechanical issues that require specialist handling. I drop it off at the Oban Bike Shop and hope the problems are fixable at a price within my budget. To fill in time, tomorrow I will take a bus to Invercargill where there is a castle, the Duke of Argyll, and home of Clan Campbell.

At the Oban Tourist Information Centre I ask them for tickets to Invercargill. They make me spell the name, go to their computers, and search for tickets. The three of them consult. They ask me again to spell the name. The three of them consult again. One of them comes over and says, “There is no Invercargill in Scotland. There is one in New Zealand. Is that where you want to go because it will take us a little longer to get the tickets?” I reconsider and tell them short phrases like Duke of Argyll and Campbell Clan seat. They brighten right up and say in unison: INVERARAY. We all laugh hysterically. I want to give them the Tourist Assistance Award of the Century for being willing to try and get me to Invercargill, New Zealand. Probably just to get rid of me.

They give me a public bus ticket to Inveraray and mention a parade scheduled for 5pm. I love parades. I run off to find this one. The “parade” is one pipe band consisting of eight pipers and six drummers. They are mustered in a small parking lot. During the warm-ups, one of their members runs from pipe player to pipe player with an electronic device, tuning their pipes. Who would have thought that anything that discordant is tuneable? A tiny crowd gathers to hear them. At 5:00pm on the dot, they head for the main street of Oban, one block away. I love the music and the drummers are a great fascination. Half of what they do is hit their drum. The other half is fancy things with their pompom drumsticks, like swinging them over their heads and whipping them 360 degrees around their wrists before striking the next beat. It’s amazing they don’t bean themselves or anyone else. The “parade” consists of the one pipe band and the small crowd that has gathered at the start. Except as we get moving, more and more people fall in behind while we walk the main street along the shore of Oban Harbor. And it grows, and it grows. And it IS a parade. A parade of people who are just caught up in it all and who love the sound of Scotland.

The sun is out, making the one hour bus ride to Inveraray even more spectacular. Buses go everywhere here. Big coach buses on one track roads. The fear and excitement of tearing down a one track road with a cliff on at least one side is better than a roller coaster ride. We pass Loch Awe and the substantial remains of 14th century Kilchurn Castle, one of the most photographed castles in Scotland. It is quite intact for a ruin of its age and ideally situated with Loch Awe in the foreground and 590 metre Beinn Bhòidheach behind. Next is Inveraray on Loch Fyne, renowned for its seafood and surrounded by mountains.

Inveraray is a picture postcard place. I sit on a waterfront bench and try to convince myself it is real. The town is small but full of interesting bits, like tea rooms where they have heat. I make it to four of them. The castle is expensive, and I do not go in since I am trying to keep to a budget (and also saw the whole castle tour on TV). The castle is testament to what happens when you sided with the Royalists and, after Culloden, got to keep your castle, as did Clan Campbell. The castle tea room does NOT have heat so after huddling over my tea cup for fifteen minutes, I move on.

What I do watch is a group of kids and their coach who are training for shinty, the local game involving a stick that looks like a hockey stick and a lot of brutality. The local papers are full of shinty game reports, inevitably with one or more photos of a player whose head is covered in blood, getting patched up to re-join the fray. What is so hilarious about the kids is that, as you would find in any small town, they come in a wide range of ages, eleven down to two. There is a long line of them that their coach sends off to run in a circle. Watching the determination of the youngest ones to keep up with the older ones is fascinating, as is the two year old who would rather be with his Da, to whom he keeps running back every time the circle loops back in that vicinity. Also fun is watching the circle slowly implode until there are fourteen kids running around their coach with a circle radius of three metres. The best entertainment of the day. Nice to know kids everywhere are the same.

The Oban Cycle Shop calls at 13:00. My bike is done. Bus back to Oban to find that the owner is wildly apologetic about the bill which is “very expensive.” He is concerned I will be upset. They have done major rework on parts of the bike, including finding a derailleur part that was broken. The replacement part turned out to be unavailable. They then scavenged a comparable part from one of their bikes. The shop has also readjusted many things including the brakes. The total bill is £40. To those of you unfamiliar, the derailleur part alone would cost £40. They have done a terrific job. Everything is attached correctly, working as it should, and I will be safe.

Now to work on how I will not freeze to death because it is cold. I go back to my room to start packing. I hear the sound of pipes. I stick my head out the window and see, fifty metres down the street and in front of the abandoned, neo-concrete bowling alley, the award winning Oban Pipe Band which has taken up residence for the next two hours as a fund raiser. There is nothing on this street but the derelict bowling alley, houses and my hotel. I rush down to hear them and watch “Jazz Pipe Band” in action. Someone keeps doing something, either a drummer taps out a rhythm for a while or a piper plays their pipes for a while and then, organically, everyone joins in and off they go with a rousing tune (and never the same one). It is a wonderful way to celebrate my impending trip to the Isle of Mull.





CHAPTER XI. Mull





The last act in Oban is sorting out loose ends, such as preventing hypothermic death. It is cold. For my first night on Mull, I have found a “bunkhouse” for £20 a night, a good alternative. My freeze dried food order has arrived at Tesco, which now contains a Post Office. Deliveries to Post Restante have been waiting for me 100% of the time. All hail the Royal Mail! I eat a freeze-dried feast in my room. Now that I have showered myself with another Christmas comfort package, it is apparent all of this will not fit on the bike. My overfull bags are already on the verge of being unwieldy. It is hard to determine what to jettison when it is clear that I need ALL the clothes I have brought and ALL the camping equipment. I am also not throwing away any of this food because I am going to places that have none. I jam the excess food in a small backpack.

Next morning I push us over to the ferry and realise all this stuff is too much. I can barely manage it while I am walking, let alone riding. I wait for the ferry. The grey clouds open up. It hails for half an hour. Big chunks. The ferry loaders take pity on me and let me load my bike first. I love being first on the ferries for whatever sick sense of entitlement it gives. What the ferry loaders don’t know is that I am toasty warm, one blessing of all of this gear. At least I know my clothing is up to the task of surviving these conditions. My tent, however, is not. It is a three season tent and winter is not one of them. I continue to bargain with myself over cost of lodging versus liveability (and survival). I make a rule that I don’t have to camp if the weather report says the overnight temperature will be 6°C or lower. This means no tent for the next few days. However, the alternative “bunkhouse” is not quite what I had in mind. The idea of sleeping in a big room with a bunch of strangers does not suit my style, at all.

I am last off the ferry in Craignure. The ferries are economic lifelines and heavily subsidised by the government. The cost of my ticket is less than the tea and biscuits I had in the shipboard café. While I stand next to my bike in a corner of the lower deck, a crewman plops his ass right on my head. He was coming down a ladder from above. I didn’t even see that ladder above my head. He didn’t see me, either. A big surprise for both of us followed by smiles and laughter. Glad I had on my helmet. I disembark and push the ten ton bike to the “bunkhouse.”

The “bunkhouse” is nicer than my home. The warden gives me a room for four people with a beautiful en suite, sans the three other people. For three whole days. The Craignure Bunkhouse was built two years ago with the idea of accommodating travellers. The kitchen is fully furnished. In spite of needing to make a dent in the freeze dried bags, I cannot pass up the chance to cook in a real kitchen. It’s early in the day, the weather is awful, and the Craignure Shop is full of fresh food. I spend the afternoon drinking tea, cooking, reading a book, and nesting. The living area is complete with comfy sofas, tables for stockinged feet, and a fireplace. This keeps me out of the howling winds, now pelting rain, and 6°C temperatures.

Things go swimmingly until the people with dogs arrive. I do not know why people travel with dogs. I understand even less why anyone would accommodate them. It is not the dogs. It is the owners. I like dogs. But, as with these folks, most dog owners think they have a mystical relationship with their animal, which they then relentlessly disprove by yelling SIT, SIT, SIT and having the dog ignore them. The smell of wet dog makes me gag. Guess who is wet?

Meanwhile, the phone that is supposed to work in the Highlands does not. It shows three bars, but it neither calls, sends, nor has mobile data. Oddly, I am receiving a steady stream of marketing texts from Vodafone. Cleverly, I go online since the luxury bunkhouse has Wi-Fi and enter into a “chat” with Vagu. What country might Vagu be in? We “chat” back and forth for a half an hour with my being asked to do the usual 250 things that any fool would have done before throwing up their hands in disgust and allowing themselves to be victimised by online chat. We do these things, repeatedly. Finally, Vagu throws up his (or her) hands and says, “Please call our technical support people at this number.” I politely type, “And how am I meant to call them without a working phone?” I wait. A while. The next message is: “Please visit our nearest store.” Which is a ferry ride, a long train ride, and 100 kilometres from where I am. Well, no. I am not going to do that. Then I laugh hysterically because the irony of having paid £30 a month for a phone that only receives Vodafone’s marketing messages is too absurd not to laugh at hysterically.

It is time to make some efforts in the direction of making this a “bike touring” trip instead of an “overloaded bike pushing trip alternating with hiding out in tiny rooms and eating freeze dried food” trip. The weather today is for intermittent showers with the continued 25mph howling wind that I previously forgot to mention. Or it may be 25kph wind. I can’t quite tell what part of the UK has migrated to the metric system. This duplicity is augmented by all the signs now being in English and Gaelic. When I was in Scotland thirty-five years ago, things were simpler: it was English miles and English signage. Imperial everything. It is interesting to see Scottish culture clawing its own way back.

There are a few unintended consequences. One is that Johnson and Boswell[3] tell us from their travels that the native Scottish language was oral and not written. So, the signs in Gaelic are not in the native Scottish language or, if they are, they are an English approximation of the spoken name. (Johnson and Boswell also tell us that certain pieces of slaughtered cows were apportioned by the laird to certain people. The smithy got the head. The piper got the udder. The udder? With one chanter and three drone pipes, I have now discovered where bagpipes come from).

Luxuriating in civilisation because the Craignure Store has newspapers, I read the Oban Times and see a picture of the winners of the Oban Highland Festival Class C piping competition. The young man looks…Asian? The article describes the female winner as Brighde Chaimbeul, a name so Gaelic I cannot pronounce it. The male winner is Chris Lee. My first thoughts are Chris is the son of a Scottish-Asian marriage. Well, no. Chris is from Hong Kong. He had a passion for the pipes at a very early age, has taken tuition on Skype from a teacher in Nova Scotia, and wants to start his own piping school in Hong Kong.

Many good things come from this. First is that the judges were commendably apolitical in acknowledging quality playing regardless of the Scottish ancestry of the player. Two is that a young man has found his passion. Third is that his parents deserve an award (as do his neighbours). If you have ever been to Hong Kong, there isn’t a lot of room. The early years of Chris’ piping education must have been a trial for everyone.

I decide to do a load free ride from Craignure to Lochbui, another name I cannot pronounce. The fascination with the place is that Samuel Johnson and James Boswell visited it on their Highland “jaunt” in 1773 leaving me wondering how they managed it because Lochbui is near…nothing. In the worst case, I will get a headwind for one half of the trip and wind-assisted ride for the other half. I set off down the one track road. This means when the ferry lands, I run off into the bushes because of the stream of cars, trucks, and, yes, coach buses flying by on their way to Iona. After one onslaught, there is a lull until the next ferry disgorgement. The exception is people rushing from the opposite direction to get TO the ferry. Cycle travelling on one track roads has its challenges. Some cyclists fantasise they are automobiles and insist on their space. I am of the persuasion that, while I may have the right of way, a coach bus with eighty-four people is going to opt for me splattered on its front grill rather than swerve and go over a cliff.

Caution is the byword. I spend a lot of time hopping on and off the bike and standing on the side of the road to let vehicles pass. That is just fine, because the wind is blowing right in my face. I peddle for five minutes and am exhausted. It is sunny out, though intermittently. I have totally forgotten the relationship between time peddled and distance shown on the OS map. I keep thinking the turn-off to Lochbui should be imminent only to find I have travelled a very short distance. Depressing. The scenery is grand, though. It is also nice to be on the bike without a load.

At Strathcoil I find the turnoff to Lochbui and see a great granite pillar at the crossroads. A good excuse to dump the bike, scramble up to see what the monument says, and find…a peacock? A huge peacock with giant feathers that look like demented eyes. What the hell is a peacock doing in the middle of nowhere? Then it calls, and there are lots of other peacocks in the area because you hear the “I am being strangled to death” sound coming from all directions. The monument provides a break from the wind after I figure out which side is downwind and huddle there. The inscription is to Gaelic poet and songwriter Dugald MacPhail (1818 – 1887) of Strathcoil. MacPhail is best remembered for his song An t-Eilean Muileach (The Isle of Mull) now known as Mull’s National Anthem. An unexpected splash of local colour before I head off again.

Over a very steep hill. I don’t mind hills, at least the going up part. It is the going down that is the bane of touring cyclists because with all that weight on the bike, a good likelihood exists that you will be killed by your own gear landing on you if the initial crash impact didn’t do the job. Even without the bike loaded, the downhills are usually a bit daunting. But, not today. After I reach the peak, the wind is so strong that I have to pedal downhill the whole way. This is soul destroying work. When I infrequently use the brakes, the squeal is unbelievably loud. All the sheep flee. I thought this bike was fixed?

The wind is gusting, the road is tiny and winding. Guardrails are an unknown phenomenon here. Anticipating a wind-assisted trip back, my prayer is that the wind does not change direction after I get to Lochbui. The road follows several beautiful lochs, a major geological fault that is still active, aquaculture operations, old settlements, four trees, and goes on until it reaches the beach at Lochbui which is the site of an estate, Old Post Office, and adders. The estate is not a large one but contains the site of standing stones, a stone circle, and 13th century castle ruins as well as an old church. It is hard to believe that these barren and wind swept shores have been a community for nigh onto 5,000 years. In my high tech clothing, I am still on the edge of cold. How those people of antiquity survived is beyond me. How they had time on their hands to create stone circles and standing stones in these far flung places continues to mystify.

The adders come as something of a surprise. I doubt any sensible adder could move in this cold. To prove me wrong, “Beware of Adder” signs are ground-pegged everywhere. These signs are all in front of clusters of large bushes. My theory is that since Lochbui is a tourist destination, and there is no loo, that the adder signs exist to keep people from using the bushes to relieve themselves. This problem is added to by the Old Post Office which is not a post office at all. It is an unattended room that has tea, cakes, and all manner of meats and cheeses in a fridge. All on the honour system. I have tea and cake. And more tea and cake. Then I decide not to test my adder theory and cycle one kilometre out of the way to find an un-signed bush.

Praise the Lord and pass the gravy! The wind has not changed. It took me three hours to get to Lochbui. It is not going to take me but half that to get back. I feel like a land-ship and make myself sail-like big while the wind blows at my back. The other reason a headwind is soul destroying is the relentless howling of wind in your ears. There is some primal trigger that activates fear and stress. The converse is that when the wind is blowing from behind, it is silent and peaceful. The sun comes out in a few places and plays over the water in the lochs. I stop at a cemetery to see who is there. The stones are very interesting in that 90% of the inhabitants are over eighty years old. I’d heard the people of Mull were long-lived which this cemetery confirms. I navigate the stretch of “potential ferry traffic death road” at a time when the ferry has not landed or imminently leaving. The one lane road is empty. The wind behind starts pushing me so fast that I have to use the brakes. The bike performs flawlessly, thank you Oban Cycle (I am willing to overlook the 120dB squealing sound because at least the brakes now work). The ride is a great success.

I celebrate with home cooked food, wine, and by chucking out everything on my bike that is not essential. I pack up one good sized box with things that can go back to Australia. I pack up another with things that can be forwarded to the US for when I arrive there. The first cull is a triumph. Everything that remains now has an allotted space in my panniers. It’s snug, but it fits. I don’t have to worry about zippers parting or knickers being exploded to France. I have retained all my winter clothing because, unfortunately, the weather report is for more winter conditions and wind. We have one day of horrible weather forecast, so I stay at the “bunkhouse” yelling NO! NO! NO! The dog owners and I reach a state of peaceful coexistence where they now do not let their dogs roam freely. The warden does my laundry for me. Time to get serious about moving on.

I am in a quandary. I can go right, which is a long way round to Salen and where I will need to wild camp. Or, I can go left which is a short way to Salen and the Salen Hotel. The dilemmas are that the weather is predicted to be continued cold and windy. Going right means terrific scenery but a headwind and winter camping. Alternatively, I have been warned both in Oban and Mull that left, the dual lane carriageway between Craignure and Salen, is not safe for cyclists. It is putatively very hilly and even the most experienced cyclists avoid it. But, “left” means a welcome tailwind. I also can’t reconcile the OS contours with “hilly” since it appears to run along the coast and be flat. I decide to let the fates decide.

I email the Salen Hotel to see if they have any single rooms available at the advertised £35. The Salen Hotel returns my email. As I so often find, the advertised price does not match with the quoted price. I am offered a single room at £60. This is so far out of my budget that I thank them but decline. Oh well, I am going right. That evening, I begin readying for next day’s departure. This means organising the bags and steeling myself for a fully loaded ride into the headwind, meant to be a howling twenty-five something/hr. And overcast. And cold (10°C high for the day and 5°C overnight). And soul destroying. But it is hard to complain when you look left, you look right, and all you see is breathtaking, heart stopping beauty. I know I won’t freeze to death in my three season tent because I can sleep in ALL my outdoor clothes and mound the rest on top of me like a Viking burial.

Thank the Lord and pass the ketchup! The Salen Hotel emails me back early that evening. How about £45, they say? But you have to stay for two nights. My response is, £45 sounds like an inexpensive way to cheat death. I accept. Now to survive the ride on the dual carriageway, which with a tail wind should take no time at all. It doesn’t. It is also far from a dangerous road. Perhaps people who travel on single lane roads are awestruck by the speed of going over forty something/hr. It is a good road, understanding that the same “run to the bushes and hide with the bike until the ferry traffic passes” rule still applies. I feel blessed by divine intervention when, without explanation, the brakes stop squealing and the phone starts working. I get to Salen so early nothing is open. All I want is tea and HEAT. I huddle in a wind-free side of a building for half an hour until The Coffee Pot opens and then fling myself into its embrace, commandeer the fireplace, and don’t move for two hours.

After warming up, I dump off my bags at the Salen Hotel and take off for Australia. This is not a misprint. Lachlan Macquarie’s grave site, a monument gifted to Australia by the UK and owned by the Australian National Trust, is five kilometres from The Coffee Pot. Against all odds and in the middle of absolutely nowhere is a well maintained reclusive spot with the mausoleum, managed by the Scottish National Trust on behalf of the Australian National Trust (because of practicality says a sign).

Lachlan Macquarie has garnered the title of “Father of Australia” not because he was the first Governor of Australia (he was the fifth) but because of his practice of integrating all types of people into the fabric of Australian life, giving us the beginning of our multi-cultural society. An over simplification, I know, and one that skirts the colonial things he did that wouldn’t pass muster today. What is saddening, though, is that his egalitarian work was so opposed by the British who had appointed him that he was recalled and spent the last years of his life trying to clear his name of malfeasance. His highly regarded wife Elizabeth is the reason so many streets in Australian capitals are named “Elizabeth Street.” Macquarie was born and grew up on the island of Ulva, six kilometres west of where I am. I sit on the ground, the memorial at my back, and eat my lunch in its sunny warmth thinking how lucky I am, an Australian immigrant, to be a historical recipient of his good work.

The next day is a load free ride since I am staying at the Salen Hotel for the required two nights. The problem with planning rides using the OS maps is that it is often hard to tell what one might be getting into. There is a track that goes up the east side of Loch Frisa that has the potential to be spectacular. However, the contour lines are very close together. This means one of two things. One, it is an easily rideable track that hugs one contour. Two, it is a meandering goat path that goes up and down so often that the map can only show one contour because the map makers can’t fit in all the ups and downs. The other option is a road up the west. It doesn’t quite look like it goes along the Loch. Also to be considered is that malaise has returned. I have been out of sorts for a while. Things just don’t seem to be moving along. I decide to let the fates determine what happens next.

In the morning I eat the offered FULL SCOTTISH BREAKFAST because it is part of the package. It continues not to be the ideal pre-workout meal. The wind has backed down a bit. The road up to the decision point is beautiful, overlooking the Sound of Mull and Aros Castle, another 13th century ruin. The sun plays hide and seek. When I get to the decision point I am energised enough to head off on the easterly route along Loch Frisa. The reward is that it is an easily rideable forest track, big and wide, and splendidly beautiful. I can see Ben Mor, the highest mountain on the island. I can also see the mountains of South Mull from my high vantage point. I spot what I think is a crannog in the loch. I am fascinated that a Neolithic culture was alive, thriving, and robust enough millennia ago, enough so that I am quite taken with crannogs and all they imply. Even though it is not on my OS Map as a crannog, it later proves to be indicated as such on an archaeological survey. It pleases me that I have developed an eye, admittedly very basic, for some of what the landscape is telling me.

Towards the end of this track is a bench. Often there are benches in the middle of nowhere. They are inevitably memorials to special people. They are also, inevitably, at places that have a calming and beautiful vista. Frequently the problem with riding is that you don’t look behind you. This bench is facing the opposite way. I stop and see a plaque denoting “To Our Dad, who loved to be in nature.” I sit. The view is breathtaking, overlooking Ben Mor, the south of Mull, and Loch Frisa. I can’t think of a more fitting memorial. That it is fifteen years old and not marked by one bit of graffiti says much, I think.

The crossover from east to west involves a hill. A steep one. The geology here is oriented in such a way that the ice age created north/south depressions, leaving the east west direction a biking challenge. This particular hill is dauntingly steep with switchbacks. As I tackle rise number fourteen, a woman with long black hair, in a skirt, on a bike flies up the hill passing me. It is a surreal experience. How can this be? I am fit and going as fast as I can. She is fat and hardly pedalling. Then it twigs. Electric bike. I look at her in the distance and see the tell-tale thickening of the bike frame under her seat. It is truly amazing how well that electric bike works. So much so that I am now inspired. If I get to the point where pedalling two tons of stuff up hills is tedious, I can technologically upgrade. The prospects of lifelong bike touring open up in that one moment, for which I am deeply grateful. I would return the favour by suggesting she wear a helmet, but she is too far gone.

I arrive at Dervaig, a very attractive village with its white croft houses lining the street and the oldest pub on the island. I take a break to get out of the weather only to discover that not only is the pub old. It is cold. Fish and chips are accompanied by the deeply incongruous sound of heavy metal music. I cannot gag down the chips. I have reached the point where I never want to see another chip. The beer is very fine, though. The barkeep tells me how she has travelled to Korea, China, Cambodia, Laos, India, France, and many other places working as an English teacher. She has just landed here for the tourist season. After, she and her partner will go somewhere else. As it is not very warm in the pub, I move along fairly quickly in spite of her fascinating travel stories, before heading down the westerly route home.

One of the signs informs that Croig, a village not far north of here, is where they used to land the cattle from Coll. What is with these people and swimming cattle across great stretches of salt water? Coll is an island ten kilometres across open water from Croig. I also suspect the swimming cattle did not stop at Croig but headed across Mull to their next departure beach, then on to the next island or the mainland. The idea of cattle as long distance swimmers is disturbing.

The signs also speak to sustainable forestry. The Scots are becoming defensive about the lack of trees in their landscape. This sign starts by blaming Neolithic people who, in between creating stone circles, cairns, tools, crannogs, and standing stones allegedly deforested the entire Highland landscape so they could hunt large prehistoric animals. I am not buying it.

Sustainable forestry is not a good look. The map shows the westerly route back to Salen as a minor road that follows a river between two large north/south ridges. Looking at the map, it should be a beautiful ride. Two things mar the experience. First, is the sustainable forestry. There is a public movement towards reforestation and a continued advancement of the idea of sustainable forestry. However, what I see is forests recently cut. For every 100 acres of trees hacked down, I barely see one acre that is reforested. A vicious scar of a new road on the far ridge may be an indication that reforestation is coming. One doesn’t build that kind of substantial, expensive (and ugly) new forest road unless something else is to follow. But ugly it is to look at, as are the tree stumps which make up much of the landscape. What isn’t deforested is grazing land.

The second jarring effect has to do with agriculture, specifically cloven hoofed animals and particularly cattle. In the soft wet ground, the environmental impact is striking. If the land isn’t tree trunks, it is churned up earth and peat, the water runoff from which all heads downstream, carrying silt and cow or sheep poo. The whole effect of this twenty kilometre ride south from Dervaig is environmental destruction. But then, I am an outsider. People need to earn a living. This has been going on for centuries. How else are these island communities to survive economically? The ultimate realisation is not a square inch of the Isle of Mull has been untouched by man, and sometimes not in a nice way.

Off to Tobermory. The wind is at my back. It is not raining. The map tells me that there is a hill. It is hard to tell what kind of hill. I discover only too soon that it is hill type two. The one where the contours are so close together that you can’t tell if it is really, really steep. Well, this one is. How is this is going to play out because even with the wind at my back, it periodically gusts and provides “toppling over” excitement? The climb goes on forever but involves minimal pushing. I have discovered that low gear on my bike is slower than walking so I can make it up just about any hill. That being said, low gear is a long, tedious affair. The counterpoint is the elevated views over the Sound of Mull, ships and boats plying back and forth, as well as Morvern Peninsula, the wilderness opposite.

Descending this hill is a relief as it widens to a dual carriageway. The last half mile into Tobermory is on foot because the approach to town is too steep. Visions of me and my bike shooting off the end of the pier at supersonic speed entertain me for the walk into the central business district. The ferries used to land at Tobermory but no longer. I speculate the investment in the road was considered a cheaper alternative to subsidising ferry service. It will be interesting to see how Tobermory has been affected economically by that decision.

It would appear: not at all. Tobermory is a picture postcard village crawling with tourists. It is the place you see with all the coloured houses on the picturesque harbour. An older couple runs a B&B, and I take the second story room with excitement. Their attached house is connected to the local Coop (supermarket)! Food will never be far away. I discover that the older couple smoke but have developed a system where they open a skylight whereby the smoke is sucked out, and the stairway to my room is made frigid. The lady of the house has kindly turned my electric blanket on “high” where it remains for two days. Tobermory is a tourist town and as one Scot said to me, “We all seem to have developed economies that depend on us visiting each other.” I think this a fairly deep thought and probably right. Certainly it is in Tobermory, although there is also a smaller complementary local economy based on fishing and agriculture.

For example, when unpacking my handlebar bag it disassembles in my hands thanks to a missing “one-off” screw. I head to the Ship’s Chandler, which supposedly caters for serious boaters with exotic hardware needs. Here the tiny inventory of ship’s hardware is overwhelmed by expensive boating and tourist souvenirs. I am a nuisance with my twenty cent requirements. I head to Brown’s Ironmongers, a very old business in town that serves the locals. Brown’s has a whole wall of hardware bits that I am allowed to paw through unsupervised until I find what I need. Successful and enlightened, I retrieve one of my shipped ahead food packages from the Post Office, send off another one, and plot my next day’s load free ride.

Today’s ride involves lots of sheep and lambs. A Mendelian[4] delight. White ewes with white lambs. Black ewes with black lambs. Whites ewes with black lambs. Black ewes with white lambs. And, my personal favourite: black ewe with one bright white lamb and one black one. Sheep and lambs are everywhere. The new lambs are easy to spot because they are bright white. Every time I ride past, the newest lambs scurry to hide right behind their Mums, totally camouflaging themselves. This automatic response from a creature a day or two old confirms how much of survival is hardwired.

The lambs behave just like human children. As they get older, they wander further from their Mums and pal up with some of the other lambs. Off they go bouncing up and down like cartoon sheep. They sometimes get misplaced during playtime. I watch as two lambs, after racing around for fifteen minutes, both confidently walk off with a ewe. Then one, not so confidently. After twenty metres there is much looking back and forth until lamb number two realises that, perhaps, the ewe he is following is not Mum. She confirms this by totally ignoring him. The bleating starts. Little bleats. I can see his real Mum because she raises her head, and then puts it right back down and also ignores him. The lamb bleating gets progressively more frantic until the bleats reach panic proportions. Finally, Mum raises her head and goes “Baaaaa” with a resultant mad rush back to home base.

She better keep her little lamb close. I went by a small paddock containing ewes that had no little lambs. I do not think they were penned there in readiness for a Mediterranean vacation.

Today’s adventure is out to Glengorm Castle, a luxury hotel, where I can pay £280 for a room, plus £15 for breakfast. At that price breakfast should be included, but I quickly move off that moot point after calculating one night’s stay would chew up my budget for the week. After slogging up the monumental hill out of Tobermory, the road turns right past the Isle of Mull Cheese shop. From here, the road to Glengorm is not a luxury road. I ride by a massive sewage treatment plant which must enchant the hotel guests. Most small communities have septic holding tanks. The puzzle as to where these are emptied has now been solved. Glengorm Castle is slightly above sea level. Yet the road to Glengorm is mostly uphill. I do not understand it. (I understand it even less when the road back is mostly uphill as well). Further along is a communications complex with towers poking out everywhere. Scenic it is not.

I make it safely to Glengorm Castle and, like the other non-paying guests, am routed to the Glengorm Coffee Shop and Art Gallery. The Art Gallery has on display a series of three photos. The series shows a close up of a rare white-tailed eagle pre, during, and after making a dive and claw-catching a fish, all in stunning detail. I will never see that in real life. Seeing it in photos is quite exciting. The standing stones aren’t far off although the trail there is circuitous to keep us all out of the eyes of the castle guests. From the stones, I make a clever left to the next cycle track that will take me back. As I travel along I realise I am truly in a place where, if I have an accident, I will not be found for a long time. If at all. I pat myself on the back that my great sense of direction will prevent me from getting disoriented.

That is, unless I get lost. Which happens next. I have my map. I do not have a compass. After several kilometres of forest track, I turn the corner and know I will see a microwave tower. No microwave tower appears. In fact, the topography in front of me looks nothing like what it should. As I stand bamboozled on the forest track who should appear, like a gnome, but a farmer with his tractor. I flag him down. He is more surprised than I. After telling me it is “much of a much” to go one way or the other, I decide that backtracking makes more sense because he will be following at a distance on his tractor. Then, I promptly miss turn two. An hour later I re-join the main road with the entire return trip remaining. After all this I am (a) glad I have my emergency personal responder beacon (EPRB) so they will at least find the body and (b) not feeling very clever after all.





CHAPTER XII. Ardnamurchan





Time for another small ferry ride, this time to the Ardnamurchan peninsula. Have you ever heard of the place? I hadn’t. I thought it was just another de-forested, sheep infested patch of Scotland with a lighthouse located at the furthest western land point in the UK. I wonder how Northern Ireland feels about that claim. Ardnamurchan is a Geopark. What is a Geopark we both ask? The European Commission has designated certain locations in Europe as places of geological significance. It is easy to understand why, once you learn about Ardnamurchan. This you do the minute you get off the ferry. The sign at the ferry landing has a picture of the shoreline, the shoreline right in front of my face not the shoreline in the distance, and explains all kinds of things about how each different chunk of rock was formed by the three volcanos that created Ardnamurchan. Three volcanoes. I love volcanoes. This is going to be interesting.

It is. The first part of interesting is considering how some of my ferry mates plan to travel. For example, one pair of cyclists look very fit but lightly laden. They have expensive racing bikes and are cloaked head to toe in spandex. I ask where they have been and where they are going. Well, yesterday they rode from Iona to Tobermory (which took me five days). Today, they will ride from Tobermory to either Mallaig or Fort William. By comparison, I am planning to take at least a week to get to Mallaig. What kind of trip are we going to have? Not the kind of trip that involves learning much about people or the place they are travelling through, since they clearly won’t be stopping anywhere. Indeed, they don’t even take time to look at the ferry landing’s geological information sign, racing right off. They won’t see much wildlife. They will miss the volcanoes, but volcanoes aren’t everyone’s thing. I feel inadequate at taking so long to get where I am going, compared to them.

After filling my head with shoreline geology, I stop at the Kilchoan Community Centre and fill my head with volcano geology because of the excellent exhibit. The Centre is a focal point for community services and tourist information. It’s abuzz with local goings on. Invited into the tearoom, I meet some of the residents and chat about where to go and what to see, while stuffing my face with home baked cake. Getting to learn about a place and meet the people who live there suits me, which is either a wholesome thought or an eccentric excuse.

I ride to what is purported to be one of the ten best campsites in Britain for its view, an accurate description, and pitch my tent on a site with a picnic table. Most tent sites in Scotland are a patch of grass. When I get a picnic table, it feels luxurious. My tent site overlooks the Isle of Mull, Loch Sunart, and the Sound of Mull. I head off to see greater Kilchoan. On my way I pass a herd of sheep. One of the lambs is crippled. The ewe does not wait for it. It will die. I feel terrible, a fitting emotion for the next stop, Old Kilchoan Cemetery.

As you know, I like to visit cemeteries. Written on the various tombstones and monuments is much to enrich one’s historical perspective. The Old Kilchoan Cemetery is a challenge to get to since it is up the side of a steep hill. Finding a location suitable for grave digging on primarily volcanic remains presents a challenge, as attested to by the New Kilchoan Cemetery being kilometres away. Most memorial stones are for quite older persons, with one exception. One stone is from a wife to her husband, a Master Mariner who died at forty-seven, and to Wee Mary Anne, nine months. It brings home what a hard life these people must have had, husbands dying at sea and children dying from any number of contagions, all without warning or explanation.

I jolly myself up with an ice cream cup from the Kilchoan Store. Ever heard of “traditional” ice cream? It is ice cream with no flavouring other than milk, cream, and sugar. An interesting taste. Surprising that it has a commercial following since the strawberry is exquisite. I ride back to my picnic bench. To describe the glorious panorama of sea and mountains in front of me would not do it justice. To describe the change in the weather would involve the Hallelujah Chorus. The sun comes out. The temperature hits 22°C. Then for next four glorious days of sun, 20+°C temperatures, and windless days, I will explore Ardnamurchan on my load free bike. I will ride over and through two ancient caldera that formed this peninsula. Mostly I will explore the Kilchoan Community Centre Tearoom where I make friends with everyone. These visits confirm there is a close knit community here, one with great pride. I will explore the Kilchoan Store and try out the chocolate and honeycomb ice cream, too.

First, though, I ride out to the Ardnamurchan Lighthouse. In a t-shirt. I feel naked. The lighthouse is yet another of the Stevenson family constructions and a monument to their skill. The stone was hauled over from the Isle of Mull in the mid 1800’s. Looking at the lighthouse, it takes a while to twig that stones are usually quarried square or rectangular. Lighthouses are round. Thus after finding stone and getting it on site, every piece of stone needed to be manually shaped to achieve that asymmetrical roundness. Then raised to dizzying heights, thirty-six metres high at Ardnamurchan. These constructions are sturdy. Today, I can lease the lighthouse keeper’s lodging for £468 a week, although why you would want a holiday cottage in a desolate, windblown, tourist attraction escapes me.

The next day I ride out to Sanna Bay through a second ancient caldera which is the centre of the volcanic ring complex. The beach is lovely but small and tearoom-less. I walk to the shore with its white sands and small rocky ledges. A perfect place for a swim save for the water temperature. People walk the beach. No one goes near the water. I spy Skye and the Small Islands in the distance. They, especially the Isle of Rum, are also part of the volcanic heritage of this area. Think Hawaii with the chain of islands as the earth’s crust moved over a tectonic hot spot. Same here though eons older. Overall, educated by all the helpful displays, pamphlets, and local knowledge, it is a fascinating several days.

It is on the last of these days that I meet Scottish George and share the stories of the stove. I passed Scottish George a couple of times on the road to Sanna. He appears to be doing the same kind of travelling I am: ride a bit, stop and take in the view, ride a bit, sit and read, ride a bit more and think. I surmise this because at one point when I passed him he had walked up to a high point alongside the road and was just…sitting. Turns out he is staying at the same campsite. We have a chance to compare notes where my suspicions are confirmed.

George is the first person, ever, whom I have met that is seriously touring in the same way. He is incredibly well travelled having done Scotland, Europe, Chile, and other exotic places. We compare touring notes. George is as excited as I about how to weigh items on electronic scales and get the weight down. He weighs bungie cords and tie downs. I weigh knickers and tee shirts. George is eager to share special information about all of western Scotland and shows me the routes and campsites he would recommend as well as the ones he would avoid. He tells me I can get into remote Sandalwood Bay with my bike, which I thought would not be possible and a place I very much want to go. We next compare our approach to selecting equipment and items we have found that were high quality but low weight. George tells me the Swiss Army knife people make nail clippers, whose praises he sings.

Our best discussion is about stoves. I tell George about my stove experiences and how I am more than a little hesitant about starting my stove. I have had one major conflagration, as well as starting several field fires. George laughs and says nobody is a real bike tourer until they have either set something on fire and/or burned parts of their body off. He proceeds to tell me his stove stories, shows me how he is missing parts of his eyebrows and no longer has hair on the backs of his hands, and how he nearly burned his tent down, twice. It renews my enthusiasm for my stove which is a good thing because I have decided one of the reasons I feel so out of sorts is the diet of freeze dried food. When I saw that one meal had fifty-eight grams of fat (the same as one third cup of butter), I wondered why my gall bladder had not seized up. Add to that the occasional FULL SCOTTISH BREAKFAST and my total dietary fat allotment for the month is being consumed in two days. Trying to cook something that involves more than freeze dried food might help.

George, who is about thirty-five, says he is really tired and how it takes a lot of energy to lug all that touring gear around. He says it takes three weeks to get back into it. Well, it took me at least that, and I am not a thirty-five year old man. Maybe I just feel out of sorts from a combination of all these things: the food, the newness of it all, the physical stress of trying to stay warm, the emotional stress of sorting out all the pieces that make a trip come together. Maybe I just need to be kinder to myself. When I leave Kilchoan the next day, we have a final chat, some more equipment comparisons, and a few laughs. I leave hopeful.

I go to the Kilchoan Store to get some real food to cook. The owner says that in order to get where I am going today, I will have to go over a BIG hill. With a headwind. I decide to embrace my new hope and let everything work itself out. It does. It is a big hill named Ben Hiant (528m) and the highest point on Ardnamurchan. What the shopkeeper forgot was that the road is a long, gradual climb overlooking awe inspiring landscape including the Small Islands north and the Sound of Mull. It is gorgeous. The wind abates. The ride down is long and gradual, too, past lochs, Neolithic monuments and bays, including the Bay of Strangers (Camas nan Geall) with its standing stones and cairns. St Columba’s Well is on the left. At the end is the Ardnamurchan Natural History Visitor Centre with exhibits that fill in my remaining blanks in the story of Ardnamurchan. So, a great day. And I feel good. I feel like I have finally found the rhythm to this part of the trip that can make it enriching. If I survive.

Sadly, the wind has changed and the temperature has plummeted. Back to 6 °C nights and 10 °C days for the foreseeable future. At the end of the day I arrive at the Ardnamurchan Bunkhouse in Glenborrodale. The road to the bunkhouse would challenge a mountain goat. I stop every five metres to get my breath, then push the bike further uphill. It is a strange place and clearly one that was modified from something else to what it is now. The good news is that while advertised as a “bunkhouse,” I get my own room with an ensuite. Quite a treat. However, no heat. I am told the heat comes on at 6pm, which it does, and which I turn on high in spite of the three page rule book that also comes with the room and advocates energy conservation. I put this in the “Beware of the Adders” category because if they were truly serious about energy conservation, there would not be a one inch gap between my door and the door jamb.

I settle into the dining area where there is Wi-Fi and free tea. Ten minutes later the warden escorts in two people. They do not close the door behind them on entering. The cold air rushes in. I get up and close the door. They leave. They do not close the door on departure. I get up and close it. Fifteen minutes later they come in again and leave the door open. I get up and close it. They begin to have a conversation, and I think to myself: please God, not another co-dependent couple. My prayer is not answered. They are. They are so focused on the minutia of life that they miss the bigger and more important things in life, like my comfort. Twenty minutes later, they return and leave the door open. I ostentatiously get up, slowly walk to the door, and slam it so hard the windows shake. The co-dependents look at each other and think: we are staying at a place with a crazy woman. Yes, you are. Lock your door.

Co-dependency is a horrible thing. It appears to exist in many heterosexual relationships under the illusion of equal partnership where the man gives directions and the woman takes them. This is not an Australian phenomenon, nor is it Scottish from my experience. Australian and Scottish women are damned independent. It appears to be an English phenomenon, and I see it in spades on this trip. For example, on Mull I saw three couples on tandem bikes. I do not know why anyone would agree to bike touring on a tandem bike. One person looks at the scenery. The other person looks at the front person’s butt. With not much of a surprise, every front person is male and every butt watcher is female. There is only so much man-butt you can watch with any degree of satisfaction.

I watch as co-dependents “process,” in great detail, how the evening meal is going to proceed. I then watch the male half wander off to watch TV while the female one cooks, serves, and washes the dishes. I thought we were beyond this? The problem, I think, is that the English are invading Scotland. Not only do they make up a large volume of tourists and self-caterers, with self-catering seeming to be a major economic segment in Scotland. They are also buying up the property. As Scottish George observed, you sell a house in Britain and buy two in Scotland. So, they move. Sort of like the Han Chinese moving into Tibet. And, they change the culture when they do.

As I prepare MY evening meal, the co-dependants (who are the only other people who are cooking since everyone else has a car and eats out) decide that this is the exact time they need to prepare their meal. As I cook on my one hob, I find pots successively placed on the other five. I find the counter space overwhelmed with their vegetables and think: I wonder if they would miss any because I haven’t seen a fresh vegetable in weeks? I confine myself to slamming the open door only one more time and eat something with a fat content under double digits, but with enough chemicals, including monosodium glutamate, that I am rethinking packaged food here. There has got to be some kind of food that is not going to give me arteriosclerosis or a neurologic disorder.

I am getting cranky (can you tell?). I forgot to buy breakfast at the Kilchoan Store and the bunkhouse is thirteen kilometres distant from the nearest shop. This morning I have no breakfast to eat. I can have dinner for breakfast, but chili con carne just does not sound very appealing at 8am. I read for a while and then decide to ride back to the nature centre and tearoom. This proves to be a good idea. The second visit to the Natural History Centre is just as informative as the first. They also have real food and lots of fun things to look at. Included in these things are many different pocket binoculars that you can try, looking out their window at the nature filled landscape.

One of the struggles with looking at wildlife is that it is generally smart enough to stay…wild. Trying to see it has been challenging since sightings are far in the distance. Also, the locals make fun of you when you get it wrong, as in the day I saw an otter that was actually a rock. There are also several really big birds here: rare white-tailed eagle, rare golden eagle, and abundant buzzard. The locals call the buzzards “tourist eagles” because they are big and the tourists claim to see the rarer eagles when, in fact, what they have seen is a buzzard. I buy a pocket set of binoculars (to lighten my load). For £16 they have an optical clarity that my expensive set at home can’t approach. Thank you, China. The next two hours are spent at the edge of an estuary watching birds, of which there are many, and ending the day on a fine note.

Off again after a night of no heat. Evidently I didn’t understand that the heat comes on at 6pm on alternate days, or some mystical schedule, because it didn’t come on last night. Perhaps I was being punished for putting it on high the evening before which, thankfully, heated up the walls sufficiently to radiate warmth throughout the night. I am off with no destination in mind which is a good sign because it means I have finally found my trip rhythm. This includes: stop stressing and just letting things evolve.

The first section of road is glorious. It has ups and downs that remind me of Yorkshire and Tranquiliser Dart Jane. I coast down one hill, pedal a couple of times, crest the next hill, and coast down the other side. I stop for a bit to watch white-tailed eagles before I remember that they do not fly in flocks and realise, after pulling out my new pocket binoculars, that they are seagulls. I ride along Loch Sunart, a monstrously deep (124m) sea loch and noted for its biodiversity. As one local said, they are trying to protect everything they can. Thus, Geopark, UNESCO, Marine Park, whatever it takes. Loch Sunart is a Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area. The Gulfstream upwelling happens off the mouth of Loch Sunart resulting in lush marine life some of which looks absolutely tropical, like red anemones. It means a very nice food chain for mammalian and avian wildlife. The remoteness of Ardnamurchan peninsula on the north and Morvern peninsula on the south qualify this area for wilderness. Thus European Commission money comes in and vast swathes of the landscape are protected. Lucky me.

I pass several stretches of road with signs saying the road improvements are a joint venture of the European Development Commission and the Scottish Government. The signs appear to have cost more than the improvements. What is the wisdom of upgrading a one lane road such that only a short random 200 metre segment is now two lane? The purpose of government appears to have become self-promotion as opposed to being custodians of the culture. In that frame of mind I reach Salen (not the Mull Salen, the Ardnamurchan Salen).

Salen has a pub, with all its doors open to the fresh air. I order soup. I huddle over the soup. It is vegetable soup. It looks like applesauce. It tastes exactly like what you think applesauce coloured vegetable soup would taste like. It comes with two tiny bits of bread. The more expensive the meal, the smaller the serving and pieces of bread. I then order smoked salmon in garlic sauce. It tastes oddly sweet. Three kilometres down the road when I revisit lunch, it is apparent that the sweet taste was from the thirty cloves of garlic that were in the sauce. I reek of the stuff. Wild camping is in the cards for tonight. No bunkhouse will have me.

Next stop is the bustling centre of Acharacle. As the Ardnamurchan epicentre, it would be bustling except it is Sunday. Everything is shut. I am grateful that the Village Store is run by heathens and open. The further north I get, the fewer exceptions I am expecting to find to this “Sunday is a rest day” rule. I load up on food, including a one kilogram bag of oatmeal. Not rolled flat or quick oats, this bag of oats turned into meal (looks like burghal) will turn out to be a one kilogram safety backstop for the rest of the trip. You can eat oats for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. It goes with sugar. It goes with salt. You can cook it, pour it into a drawer, and cut slabs of it out to munch on during the day as did the Scots of old. It is one of the most versatile food products I have come across, travels well, and fills me up.

Good thing because am headed to what, on the map, looks to be a truly appealing beach with a stream where I can wild camp. It is six kilometres off the main road and remote. As I pedal along, I come to the river Allt Beithe, a bridge, and a gate with signs on it. Many signs. The first sign says: “You are entering an old Ministry of Defence site that has unexploded ordinance. If you see any, tell the police.” Tell them before or after the explosion? The next sign says, “A portion of this area has been exempted from the free access laws and is being used to shoot a movie.” A movie? I thought I was getting away from it all.

Someone who has access keys drives up and tells me I can certainly enter, but I am not to jump over the wooden fence. Hmmmm. I ask him what type of movie, but he says that is confidential. This means to me, given the location and the six satellite dishes, it is one of those reality things. My remote beach is on the other side of the movie operations. I can get there, provided I agree to stay on my side of the fence. The fence goes on for several kilometres. It is a serious fence. They have erected posts and two metre high solid board fencing along the entire distance. The idea is you can’t look in (or the inmates can’t get out). My suspicions are that with all that green pine timber from which this fence has been built, there will be gaps aplenty at the end of summer. Whomever has also “upgraded” the road with large rocks such that it is not cycle-able. I persevere, pushing away, and get to the remote beach. Here I am greeted by yet another sign about what to do when I find unexploded ordinance.

I run down to the Singing Sands, this beach being one of those rarities where you may shuffle along and the result is a “singing.” I came especially for this treat and, ordinance be damned, I am going to shuffle, walk and run until I produce the desired sound effect. What I manage to produce is exhaustion, disappointment, and delayed terror when in a fit of pique I stomp my feet mightily on the ground. Time to put up the tent before I blow myself up.

The first worry is whether I should shove tent pegs into the ground. The area looks well trammelled. I take my chances, figuring if there is a loud “BOOM” someone from the movie will come take pictures and the ordinance informed police will notify my family. It is a lovely site overlooking the Small Islands and Skye. A historical ford over the river Allt á Ghoirtein Fhearna lends it more charm. The wind is howling, but the tent site is out of the wind. The stream is perfect. I give my water purification set a go. It works well enough that I am, at worst, deluded into thinking I am not drinking parasites and poo.

The funniest thing I ever read about water bourn parasites was brought to me by a Lonely Planet Guide to Nepal back in 1987. The guide told one how to self-diagnose a variety of worms and parasites and said that if you were infected with the intestinal parasite Giardia, you would have the worst smelling farts imaginable. I thought this was hysterical until I got Giardia, twice, and found it to be true. Anyway, I don’t want it again so I purify everything except tap water and, in the case of non-regulated Scottish campgrounds and village water supplies, that too.

Much of the stove use problem is performance anxiety. When surrounded by other campers, it is difficult not to worry about drawing attention with a two metre high priming flame. No worries here. My two metre high flame will be far less dangerous than the bomb I may find. The stove goes just fine, as does dinner (with oatmeal), as does an evening of sitting on a sheltered bit of dune, drinking tea, and watching the birds through my pocket binoculars.

This peace is interrupted when two fashionably dressed young women complete with designer purses walk by my campsite. I cannot even imagine how they got here. Then there is the family with the two barking dogs that front up but leave fairly quickly, before I get to use my NO! NO! NO! The night is meant to be cold so a test of the winter gear and three season tent. I am ashamed to say I have brought a Kindle that has movies on it, specifically the entire library of Downton Abbey reruns. I am chilly and wonder if it is more fear of cold than cold. Two hours distracted by Downton Abbey reruns I realise I am cosy, warm, and tired enough to fall asleep. And I do.

The next morning of cold, overcast and windy weather does not arrive. When I finally wake up, it is warm, sunny and wind free. It was my first truly wild camping night. It went well. I lived. However, trying to put everything back in its place takes a good long time, partly because I am not a functioning human being until I have had coffee, and there isn’t any. I am delighted that I have discovered the mystery food that will make my trip a success - oatmeal. I had it for dinner. I have it for breakfast. It is warm, wonderful, filling, and fat free. Laced heavily with freeze dried fruit and a giant glob of sugar, it is balanced and delicious. Yet another problem solved. Back past the movie site, pondering all along what it really is for and devious ways to find out, and a return to Acharacle.

It is Monday. I discover Monday is as good as Sunday and how businesses make sure they get a two day weekend. Everything is still closed with the exception of the store and one small eatery, a takeaway. I decide to test the expensive meals/less bread theory. Although inside seating is available, the air is so thick with Fryolater fat that I choose to eat in the cold rather than become encrusted. I order carrot-coriander soup with bread and a bacon roll for lunch. For a third of what I paid for brown soup and garlic linguine, I get fantastic homemade soup, a giant slab of bread and butter, and a bacon roll (to make up for the fat deficiency of oatmeal). Revitalised, I ride off to Castle Tioram waiting to see how the day evolves.





CHAPTER XIII. Moidart and Arasaig





Castle Tioram is an island ruin. It is surrounded by the River Shiel’s mudflats and Loch Moidart. The sea route to the Sound of Arisaig, the Small Islands, and the Inner Hebrides skirts the Castle’s northern shore. Castle Tioram is a 14th century construction. Its charm is a picturesque location and walking access at low tide. Sufficient structure remains that chunks have fallen on the unsuspecting public, earning it a Dangerous Buildings Order in 1998. The new owners proposed to restore it, but in an owner-oriented fashion (domestic apartments with only limited public access). The plans received Highland Council permission but not Historic Scotland’s approbation. Thus, here Tioram sits, in splendid ruin from my vantage point on the shore where I, without tide charts, plan to remain given my near death at Oronsay.

This safe, grassy shore would be perfect for wild camping. I watch a sea kayaking group make landfall on Eilean an Fheidh, one of many small uninhabited islands in Loch Moidart. Sadly, the road ends here. Travel choices include backtracking or walking the bike along a coastal path that overlooks the loch. The coastal path contour lines are hair raising. Since it is barely past 1pm, backtracking wins. Backtracking sometimes provides sights unseen on the first bypassing. This time it is a bridge over the River Shiel commemorating the 1899 agreement between the Right Honourable Lord Howard of Glossop and Charles Dunell Rudd Esq of Ardnamurchan, lairds respectively of the Dorlin and Ardnamurchan Estates. The agreement designated the midpoint of the river as the boundary between their two estates. I stand in the middle of the bridge, straddling that line, and look for fish. The shadows of the trees obscure them. The river’s banks have long boardwalks extending midstream. Salmon fishing is big here now that the sea trout fishery has crashed. The wind is from the north. Given there is nothing between me and the polar ice cap, the occasional mists feel like ice crystals.

Sometimes the impending weather dictates the decisions. The next two days are meant to be windy, rainy, and altogether not very nice riding. The forecast is for the weather to move in midday Tuesday. It is Monday. I can wild camp tonight and finish the rest of the ride on Tuesday, praying the weather holds off. Or, I can scurry along today and, perhaps, make it to safety early. The further north I ride, the fewer the alternative route options. Sometimes this is good because there are no worries about where to go or getting lost. Sometimes this is distressing because the only way involves narrow contour lines, like this one.

The first stretch of road follows Loch Shiel. The southern part of the loch is a giant bog. The area is a glacial moraine which means flat. I like the flat bit. However, the landscape is not as inspiring. The road turns left and starts to climb and climb. In the background are mountains of 600+ metres, technically not large but impressive, rising straight up from sea level. I search for Captain Robertson’s Cairns on my slow ride up. The three cairns were built in 1868. It is unclear why. The OS map is crystal clear as to their location, a point where the road widens and across the street from a viewpoint. I find the viewpoint, complete with ratty picnic table and stone marker describing Robertson’s Cairns, but no cairns. I hate when this happens because it usually means the day has attracted bad karma.

I stop, taking in the panoramic view over Loch Sheil. Five minutes later one cyclist appears, followed shortly thereafter by his wife. They are transplanted Brits. After summering here for twenty-five years, they permanently relocated last year. I ask how their first winter went, since the days would have about eight hours of sunlight and not compare to an English winter. Their response: “Dark.” I give them another couple of years.

Sweat soaked and only in t-shirts, they start to shiver, say goodbye, and head back down. After one last plaintive look for the missing cairns, I continue up over the hill and descend into Ardmolich, a wonderland of glens, little lochs, and bridges. Standing on an abandoned stone bridge over River Moidart, I ponder riding upstream on the dead end road to find a wild camping place. The wind gathers. A howling north headwind. The only good news is that the coastal route from Castle Tioram ends here. It would, indeed, have been unpassable with the bike. I stop for a minute, decide I have plenty of energy and, totally disregarding the bad karma warning, keep going. The next seven kilometres along Loch Moidart look flat on the map. That leaves only six kilometres over one hill, ending at the next bunkhouse.

The road is, indeed, flat. I pass the Seven Men of Moidart, a euphemism in that only two are left. When Bonnie Prince Charles came ashore with his seven retainers, the seven were eventually memorialised by the planting of seven trees, five of which have been destroyed by storm damage. The remaining two are huge but quite far out in an exposed paddock near the loch. This might explain why, with no protection, they have suffered such destruction. Attempts to replant the missing trees have been repeatedly unsuccessful. This is Bonnie Prince Charles country and the references to him are frequent since he had many supporters here. It is, though, saddening since the results of the Jacobite uprising was a diminishment of the Scots and their culture. Thus, whenever a Scottish cultural cell is now flourishing, be it pipes, dance, poetry, weaving, or the like, the counterpoint against the past destruction of it is poignant. After the next gust, I head out. The pedalling gets more challenging with the topography of the hill ahead unclear.

I am a fool. Not only can I not find large historic cairns. I cannot read maps. The rock cuttings and embankments designated on this stretch should have given away the topography. It is a very, very steep hill. With a headwind. And cold. It takes me an hour to get to the top, the short distance of one kilometre. At one point there is a sign saying ten degree grade ahead. I revel in the delusion that I am about to crest the hill and that the grade is down. No such luck. It is more of a continued grind, involving walking and pushing.

Finally, I remember to turn around and look not at the hill ahead but the scene behind. It is spectacular. It is everything you see in postcards of the Scottish Highlands, although the Scottish Tourist Board would Photoshop in sunlight. I met someone in Oban who told me that the Scottish Tourist Board hires a photographer and makes him sit at one site for 364 days because it will take that long to get a picture in the sun.

After the summit my reward for not sitting down on the road and weeping in frustration is a long, gradual descent. The coast down takes ten minutes. I land in the village of Glenuig with its bunkhouse, sea kayaking school, and upscale pub. With no functioning brain cells left, ignoring both the day’s karma and next day’s weather report, I inquire about the sea kayaking school thinking it would be fun. No spots available for the next two days. Dejected, I follow the directions to the first story bunkhouse.

The bunkhouse is truly that, although very new and well appointed. Eight beds in a small space. I have five bunkmates who are not the soul of discretion and whom I get to see run around in their jocks 24/7. Then there is the older couple who poke their heads in and ask if there are a men’s and women’s bunkhouse? They get the bad news and also get the same entertainment. I hunker down in the downstairs pub and have smoked duck on beetroot and arugula salad with homemade grain bread. I have Australian wine. I have sticky toffee pudding. Life is good.

The next day is a clean and tidy day. Or, a “No way am I going out in that crap” day. The wind howls, blowing the rain horizontal. The realisation of my close escape from sea kayaking really cheers me up. Good karma has been restored. I watch as twelve people are outfitted in an unbelievable amount of foul weather gear and told that “classes are never cancelled, no matter how bad the weather.” Sucks to be them. For dry me, it is time to housekeep.

A clean and tidy day means, amongst other things, reflecting on the bane of a rough traveller’s existence - personal hygiene. Hand washing is a problem. In a cloudless, rainy, and humid climate, drying times are measured in months. Since there is only so much room to carry clean replacements, the continued challenge is to answer this question: how long can I wear this shirt, these knickers, or socks before it is going to cause a problem? The problem falls into two subcategories: smell or itching. For example, I thought I solved the problem of the t-shirt because I bought this terrific seventy-hour men’s antiperspirant that is activated by sweat. That sounds like three days per tee shirt to me. That plan crumbled when my armpits broke out in an itchy rash with festering sores.

It is a given that knickers are one day apiece since, as I mentioned, I found magic underwear that is made from high tech, quick dry, microbial treated fabric. My underwear costs more than my bike. Daily knicker changes means shorts will last for three days, too. That leaves socks. Socks, you would think, might have a long re-use life. Unfortunately I discover that when you misjudge, not only are your socks and feet affected by both the smell and itch. Your shoes become a petri dish for weird things. The weird things do not go away. The smell is unfathomable. This happened once before when I misjudged and thought five days was OK. Socks are now on a four day cycle instead of the five, and I need to clear up the five day problem I mistakenly created. I will not be able to sort that out until I find a chemist. Or an industrial chemical plant.

The other part of clean and tidy days is confronting the aging process. It is bad enough that as you get old, gravity wins. Everything falls down. I remember one friend telling me she leaned over a mirror placed flat on her counter and was so terrorised by what she saw that it took an entire bottle of wine to get her sanity back. My main complaint is hair. The ones that sprout everywhere they never existed before. Particularly on your face where you can’t see them since the aging process has also eliminated your near vision. Unless you decide to make a purposeful hunt for the damn things, you front up to meet the locals looking very fuzzy and unkempt. For my part, I think the black cloud coming out of my shoes will distract them.

Dinner was so superlative I decide to have lunch downstairs, too. A middle aged couple bring their dog into the restaurant. It barks. The dog owners take it off the leash. It heads right to me. I yell NO! The dog owners run over and put the dog’s leash back on. They then let the dog roam around the restaurant trailing its leash. How this is an improvement? The dog barks again. The owners talk to it. The woman reproachfully asks the dog: “Molly, do you want to go sit in the car?” With every fibre of my being I direct my telepathic powers at Molly the Dog and try to convince her to say: “Please, no, I do not wish to sit in the car. I would rather be roaming around the restaurant unsupervised, annoying the customers and barking.” To my insurmountable chagrin, Molly the Dog does not speak. Instead she looks at her owners with a gaze of “Are you daft, talking to a dog?” for which insouciance she is immediately rewarded by once again being taken off the leash. Molly is slightly larger than a football. If she comes over here once more, I will put her to use. I think my aim is good enough to get her to the top left corner of their table.

The next day is meant to be bright warm and sunny. It is not. A thick mist presents itself. At least the wind is not from the Arctic. Time to make haste and depart. I head east to Lochailort along a gorgeous Loch Ailort, fed by the river Ailort. Naming innovation appears to have died here. Some aquaculture and salmon in pens, being raised much closer to shore than I have seen in other places. Certainly an undeveloped area except for the super highway coming up. Comparatively speaking of course. The Lochailort turnoff is onto a two lane road that runs from Fort William on the east to Mallaig where I might be headed, depending on how the day goes. I had considered hopping the train at Lochailort because, once again, the contours don’t look very inviting. I am now wise to the map legend for rock cuts and embankments, both of which appear. However, this section of main road parallels a railroad which, by definition, cannot operate on a steep grade. It is a mystery. I have no train schedule and am still missing a few brain cells due to two days of unbelievably good food and wine, plus a breakfast with enough cholesterol to induce a stroke.

I head onto the main road to Mallaig. In 100 metres it is no longer a mystery. It is straight up, in the rain with cars and trucks, albeit not many of them, flying by. The grade is good, though, and cyclable. A safety lane of some type runs along much of it. The road weaves back and forth with the railroad track, never physically crossing it because of bridges and tunnels. Small train stations materialise along the way. I stop at the Prince’s Cairn, the finding of which reconfirms this is a better day since I found it. The cairn is on Loch Nan Uamh on the Sound of Arisaig. It marks the spot where Bonnie Prince Charles departed Scotland in 1746 leaving his supporters to the mercies of the English, who were not well pleased he had escaped. Three hours later I find myself, tired and cold, in Arisaig. The sign gives both the English spelling (Arisaig) and Gaelic spelling (Arasaig). Was it worth the $500 in additional signage costs to share that?

The road into town follows along small stone attached cottages. I glide down, overlooking Loch nan Ceall with so many islands I cannot begin to count them. A small white building with the sign “Land Sea & Islands Centre” looks interesting. I pull in. I am hoping to find tea. No tea, a result which would normally have me moving on. However, the exhibits here are seductive. Thus, I stay. For two hours.

One surprise section talks about Arisaig as a training area for one of Britain’s WWII clandestine organisations, the Special Operations Executive (SOE). The purpose of the SOE was to create mayhem in Europe, although their mandate broadened over the war years. SOE sealed off the entire area around Arisaig while it field trained special agents to sabotage, murder, poach, and bomb. Invented here was the “double tap,” the standard two shots of the professional assassin. The training was rigorous and the complement of men eclectic, including one who later became the Queen’s dressmaker. Foreign nationals also received training, including Virginia Hall, an American with a prosthetic left leg called Cuthbert. An array of knives and their use is particularly confronting.

I move into the section for watching old videos. In addition to movies of Arasaig is rare film footage of the people on St Kilda, an island which I desperately want to visit. St Kilda is seventy kilometres west of the Outer Hebrides and was permanently evacuated in 1930. These movies chronicle a way of life that no longer exists. One of the resident narrators in the movie talks poignantly about the island resident’s decision to leave. For the older folk, it was a heart wrenching and very sad decision, motivated primarily by the distance from health care and the desire to provide a better life opportunity for the young folk. The film shows the men being lowered over the edge of great cliffs to gather gannets, the daily meeting to share work, and other aspects of a living community, right before it disassembled. During this time, I have slightly thawed.

Pensive, I head for the tearoom at the yachting centre with its view of the multitudinous islands. The tearoom is warm. I spend the first half hour eating lemon drizzle cake and drinking a pot of tea that is enormous, say one litre worth of tea. I only drink it after first huddling over it like a fire. Things brighten up, and I order a tuna mayonnaise sandwich that comes with vegetables, a food item with which I have only cursory experience on this trip. After an hour and a half, out I go to take the recommended alternative route to Mallaig as opposed to the superhighway route.

What people do forget is that alternative routes have been replaced by newer routes for a reason. The reasons are: the old route is longer, more winding, hillier and more difficult. This one meets all the criteria. It goes by beaches that are meant to be some of the most beautiful in the world. They were before all the static caravans got dumped on their shores. I come to one campground sign where I decide, let’s stay here. It looks like it will be sunny, and I am tired. But once again sign confusion results in my missing the real entrance. Not wanting to backtrack a mile once I realise the error, I go on. And go on.

I stop at one memorial bench to overlook a loch and see an otter that this time is not a rock. It is seaweed. I also notice that there is a rumbling in my bowels and begin to think…oh, please. Not the tuna mayonnaise. Meanwhile, a Mr Whippy truck and I have been leapfrogging for the last thirteen kilometres. He stops in the most obscure places, plays the tune, and people come out for ice cream in this wet, cold, and windy weather. I pedal like mad, overlooking the Small Islands and the Isle of Skye, knowing that the ticking time bomb is not the bike, but me.

As I ride into Mallaig with very clenched cheeks, since there are not too many options for rumbling bowels next to the superhighway I have now re-joined, I rush to find lodging that has a toilet within three metres of the bedroom because: Oh yes, the tuna mayonnaise. Or vegetable allergic reaction. Whatever it is, it is most unpleasant. The feeling of being unwell is exacerbated by taking off my shoes, a problem which I need to fix immediately, or they will run away on their own powered by the new life form within. I manage to stumble out of the Mission Bunkhouse to find a chemist and some lethal product to dump into my shoes. I find a lovely chemist who asks what I am trying to accomplish. I point at the dark cloud emanating from my shoes, and she says, “Oh.” I am given a very expensive bottle of powder that isn’t exactly what I need but am assured will work. Unfortunately, I am not a very neat person. The general effects of dumping powder in my shoes and socks is that half of it ends up in my mouth and nose, shrinking up all the mucus membrane and setting off yet another tuna mayonnaise reaction. This is not going to be a good night. Then I discover that the radiator, right next to my bed, has a little knob. I turn the knob. Heat flourishes. I wrap myself up in the duvet, put on Downton Abbey, and hope tomorrow will be a better day.

It is. Although raining, it is warmer. I also still have another whole day to recover. Although I try to stay at the Mission Bunkhouse an extra day beyond that, they are throwing me out tomorrow which goes right along with a lot of these trip decisions getting made for me. The Mission Bunkhouse, by the way, was a mariner’s mission. It has broadened its audience so that it welcomes travellers, like me, as well as people who look like drug addicts. That is, they look like drug addicts to me. Since I am sharing the communal bathroom with them, I get to decide my comfort level, describing them as I see fit. Families also live here. This upsets me because I am confronted, once again, with my personal prejudices about how people should live. The backstory is often that they have moved from a country where they had NO economic hope and that living here with me and my toxic shoes is an improvement. It took tremendous courage and determination to move here. Their kids will have a different life. Everyone is pleasant and welcoming, all on journeys like me. Time for a bit of self-reflection, perhaps?

Downstairs is a used book store with one of the best inventories of crime novels ever. I load up. Next to it is the Mission Café, open really long hours and to which real fisherman come. Since Mallaig has a large working harbour, that means all kinds of interesting folk. I sit down, read, play with food that might not upset my tender digestive system, and take it all in.

After two cans of Diet Coke, I head out into the village which is fifty metres on either side of where I am staying. The excitement of the day is picking up another box of freeze dried food at the Post Office. I have selected more wisely this time. The majority of the food packets are made by a French company, MX3. They make food for the French Army, bit of an oxymoron that. The last package of their food was really good with a fat content in the recommended healthy range. That is, 20g per serve instead of 88g in the poisonous US stuff I was eating before. I am partial to their French Aligot (Mashed Potatoes and Fresh Tomme Cheese) and other potato based delights. After a hard day riding, my interest in food is usually zilch. Just finding the hot water to pour into the bag is enough challenge. I go back to the Mission Bunkhouse and give the freeze-dried salmon, mashed potato, and dill a try. No lower gastrointestinal tract eruptions occur. Good news.

The rest of the day is spent planning what’s next on the itinerary. The ferry schedule is convoluted. For example, it says the trip to Canna is 3.5 hours. This is because to get to Canna you need to go to Eigg, then Rum, then Canna, and only on some days. You can’t get there Tuesday, Thursday or Friday. The other islands have similarly exciting schedules that require a senior logistician (or local) to interpret. There is a good chance that if I am not careful I could end up on one of the Small Islands and have to wait four days to get back to the mainland. The Small Islands include Muck, Eigg, Rum, and Canna and are so named because they are?

Each is/was an estate and by tradition the estate owner was addressed by the name of that island. Johnson and Boswell tell one story of how the estate owner of Muck insisted on being called “Isle of Muck” because “Muck” had the same meaning in the 18th century that it does today. I decide to go to Rum, since it has the next ferry service, and I have no place to stay. Then, over to Knoydart which once had 850 people, all of whom were told one day that their boat to Canada was in the harbor and their houses were being burned down tomorrow, which they summarily were. Knoydart has a daily ferry, bunkhouse, and best of all, Britain’s most remote pub. It should be fun.

Locked in my room for two days, I missed out on much of what Mallaig is about. It is the centre of the universe for this area, small universe that it is. In addition to the Small Islands ferries is one that runs to Armadale on the Isle of Skye, nine times a day and chock full both ways with tourists. On top of this is major fishing, with fishing boats large and small everywhere. The small ferry to Knoydart leaves from the harbour, as do tourist cruises. The railway terminates here with both regular service and The Jacobite, a period steam train that chuffs into town at 12:25 each day and where you can pay £121 for a private table for two. Mallaig is absolutely hopping. I sit on a CalMac bench while I wait for the Rum ferry. I watch as large ferries come from the Sound of Sleat into Mallaig Harbour and perform unbelievable feats of seamanship, pirouetting 270 degrees before docking.

Meanwhile, small boats and sailboats clog the harbour entrance. Some sleight of hand prevents the imminent collisions, both on the water and on land because the vehicle traffic to and from the ferries is even more congested, with CalMac marshals developing crazed looks as they answer stupid question after stupid question: “Do I need a ticket? Is this the ferry? My wife and I have four dogs and we will need water and dog food on board, and it can only be vegetarian dog food. Do you have that?” It is congested with people who want to go to Skye. I do not want to go to Skye. When I was last on Skye, it was genuine and magic. Skye is now blighted with tourism and the meteoric rise in tourist services. It has become a Scottish Disneyland for which I am grateful because when the tourists go by the busload to Skye, they don’t go where I am going.





CHAPTER XIV. Rum and Knoydart





The ferry arrives, doing its astonishing pirouette into the dock. We are hurried on. Dock space is in short supply and turnaround times quick, adding to the sense of frenzied urgency. It will take 1.5 hours to get to Rum. Between the time (morning) and my digestion (delicate) I forego the CalMac cafeteria delights and stick with a can of Diet Coke for breakfast. At Rum, the landing is challenging because Loch Screscort is so shallow and the pier is so small. Most places where the ferry lands are busy places. Here there is nothing, aside from one or two employees and a small handful of waiting passengers.

I was expecting something different given the entire island is owned and managed by the Scottish Natural Heritage. I was not expecting this. I follow the crowd in the general direction to which we are pointed and pass a small information shed containing a natural history display (with more information about otters), a shore area with glamping modules, a bunkhouse, and a campground. Let’s be clear about the meaning of “campground” in this context: a plot of shoreline one quarter the size of a football pitch, 75% of which is sodden bog. On the plus side, a wooden three sided shelter is provided, good news since it is again pissing down with rain.

The rain goes on for two solid days. I am only meant to be here for two days. The bunkhouse on Rum is full. I know because I have been over there to beg. I pitch my little tent. The useable “campground” space can accommodate six small tents. I grab the highest and driest spot. Two fellow campers show up later and put their tents right next to mine, fair enough because any other place would be six inches under. They snore. The view overlooks a good chunk of Rum, Skye, and the Cuillins and partially makes up for the dampness and snoring.

I try to commandeer the wooden shelter for my very own but the two fellow campers, who are older and focused on their substantial whiskey stash, are clueless and strategically counter spread. There are two of them, and they are messier. I am driven back into a corner. That is, until I start the stove inside. The two metre high priming flame sends them running. Me, too. I hold my breath hoping that I don’t burn down the only thing keeping me from insanity. The flames die. Order is semi-restored. I sit in the shelter for the better part of a day making tea, reading maps, and looking out over a nature conservation area. In one reflective moment between relentless cups of tea, complemented by endless long walks to the far away loo, I think: “Hey, I didn’t see a water treatment plant out here. Where is the water in that pipe coming from?” The conclusion is the water is coming right out of a stream with the intake hopefully higher than the bunkhouse septic field that is only seven metres away from my water spigot.

Rum is meant to have all kinds of wildlife. It does. I see Highland ponies that are penned up. They are trained to be used as stalking ponies to carry out the stag carcasses from a shoot. Not here much, though, because the Scottish Natural Heritage experiences philosophical angst about killing their natural heritage. However, cull they must. They also ferociously study the deer problem finding such gems as: you need to cull the hinds (females) aggressively if you want a healthy stag (male) population. This directly contradicts management practices on many Scottish estates. How the deer came to Rum is unclear although one version is that the 2nd Marquess of Salisbury introduced them in 1845 along with other game, for the purpose of shooting them. Kinloch Castle was built in 1900 by a subsequent owner, for summer recreational but also for shooting. As the deer have no natural predators, they are everywhere. If you pay for a shoot, which you can do through SNH’s contractor, you should expect to spend two days on Rum if you want to bag 1 - 2 stags. Sounds to me about as exciting as shooting cows.

I look up from my tent with my binoculars and what do I see, a herd of deer right outside Kinloch Castle. I do not see otter. There are no otter. There are more otter hides. There are more otter signs. There are more otter brochures. Otters are a figment of the Scottish tourist industry imagination. Like all those Scottish Tourist Board posters of Scotland in blazing sunlight. When one of the brochures explains how to tell the difference between an otter and a seal, I am left perplexed as to how any fool could mistake a 10kg otter for a 150kg seal. Then I look at all the visitors who are wandering around Rum, chat with a bunch at the bunkhouse who appear to be sustaining themselves solely on alcohol, and understand why the brochure explanation is appropriate.

In the rain, I become a tourist site. Since all the people in the bunkhouse either don’t want to go out in the rain or are too hung over to hike more than thirty metres, they stumble over to me in my wooden shelter to find entertainment. Some of them have good tips about cycling including: go to France it is fabulous as is the food, and you need an industrial quality bike to do Iceland. Denmark, too, gets high praise. I am concerned that the continuing recommendations are based mainly on the alcoholic prospectus of each location. We have chats about my bike trip and route. I mention Glenelg is a possibility because of the Neolithic remains. The immediate response is: “Are you planning to go over the Ratagan Pass?” This in the same tone as: “Are you planning to push bamboo shoots under your fingernails?” I say, “Perhaps,” primarily because I have no idea where the Ratagan Pass is. That night I look. “Perhaps” might have been optimistic.

The other source of island entertainment is a tiny shop, think the size of your clothes closet. To get there I cycle past more deer that act tame. Then there is a close-up view of Kinloch Castle described in some informational brochures as one of the ugliest castles on the planet. I have reserved judgement until I see for myself. It is definitely a monument to Victorian excess. The cost to build it in 1900 was £15M, today’s money. The cost for the government to buy it in 1957 was £23,000. The castle is made, depending on whom you believe, of pink sandstone from Arran (Friends of Kinloch Castle) or red sandstone from Annan in Dumfriesshire (Scottish Natural Heritage). I am going with the latter because they seem like a more pedantic group. The castle truly is butt ugly due to the conflicted architecture and the stone which doesn’t look at all pink. It also looks very sad sitting there uninhabited and deeply in need of the friends who are trying to make some reasonable future plans for the place. Tours are available but my timing is bad. I head to the tiny shop that serves Rum’s thirty permanent residents and the rest of us.

Amazingly, the shop has one of everything you could ever need. It also has an amazing supply of liquor, cold beer, and a special treasure, a giant bag of kindling. My campground mates go for another crate of alcohol. I go for the kindling since I am wet and marginally cold. Also, the midges are out. The biting, blood sucking bugs from hell who live in wet boggy areas, i.e. the campground. A kind soul with pinpoint pupils offers to deliver my giant kindling bag on his quad bike. I give him a beer reward before he leaves since he won’t hit a car (there aren’t any) and the deer should be soft enough not to kill him when he inevitably runs into one. My kindling arrives. The kindling fire burns for a full day. Between the rain and the smoke it generates, the midges flee although a giant black cloud of them hovers ominously at the smoke’s edge. I end up smelling like a kipper, a truly disgusting smell. Smells like burned three day old socks. The good news is the smoke is successful in keeping the bunkhouse people away, too.

The sun comes out. I decide to ride at least far enough to say I did some cycling on Rum. Once more by Kinloch Castle whose possibilities seem endless given its proximity to Skye. Why is the Scottish Natural Heritage dragging its feet in this regard since the place is going to fall down eventually without intervention? The road heads up Kinloch Glen with Kinloch River flowing through it. At the first rise, I look back towards Kinloch to see in the pristine distance…a static caravan? Oh dear. Not quite what I had in mind. Several more kilometres as the road climbs steadily, rising well above the glen. Rum was once a volcano and a more recent version of the chain that was in Ardnamurchan and ends in Skye.

In the valley below are small lakes, some of which have crannogs. Rum has been settled since 7BC as evidenced by tools discovered here. How those Neolithic people got here and what they were doing in this god forsaken place would be a question I might have asked a while ago. I am beginning to understand they came by sea in boats they would also use to trade with the mainland. To them, this would be paradise. The land is protected by the sea, the glens by hills. The land is rich with vegetation, including trees. There is fertile arable land which the Neolithic residents used to produce oats and barley. These they brewed with honey, meadowsweet and bog-myrtle to produce what was either a drink or midge repellent. Bog myrtle is an interesting plant with interesting effects. The Vikings would brew it into a beer that some believe fuelled the Berserkers. Our Neolithic predecessors were either drinking themselves senseless or inebriating the midges. Maybe both, much like my campground mates.

Continuing on, I come upon a large erratic. When the ice age withdrew, occasional remnants included boulders balanced in unimaginable ways. This erratic has a tiny rock under it that keeps it balanced such that, if you took the tiny rock away, the big boulder would roll right down into the valley (or backwards and squish you). Unfortunately, this erratic also happens to be right opposite a gravel pit. Heavy equipment tracks raise the question of whether this erratic was the result of the ice age or some diabolical fabrication intended to dupe tourists. I touch it and am impressed, regardless of whether it is years or millennia old. I ride as far as I think I want to go and then decide, maybe keep going until just around the corner. Well, around the corner provides a panoramic view of the entire island of Rum, several of the other Small Islands, and the entire Ardnamurchan peninsula, including the beach I spent the night on near that odd fenced in area. It is a breathtaking view and heartening to see how far in my travels I have come.

Word is out. The backstory to the fenced in area? It IS a reality show where the contestants are going to be left on that small peninsula to fend for themselves. The publicity for the show tells us the contestants are being dropped off in a remote, wild, and inescapable location where they will have to forage and struggle to survive. The Scottish locals, having now found out what it is all about, have raised a holy stink about the whole endeavour being farcical. As one says, “There is a fish and chips shop as well as a pub within two miles of the place. How can anyone call that remote?” I also wonder what the hell those contestants are going to forage. Even the Scots had trouble making it through a year. They had sheep and oats. These reality show folks are going to have pine trees and seaweed. From my vantage point, I wave at them figuratively, but really wave at my old beach camp site which was great fun with its unexploded ordinance. The ride back is a coast back to the midge infested bog campsite where I pack for a morning departure.

At the ferry I meet my kindling wood deliverer, sans pinpoint pupils, now decked out in fluoro, life jacket, hard hat, doing double duty as the CalMac land based crew. I now understand why CalMac has such a fond place in people’s hearts. It is often the only way off these islands. Also, every CalMac ship comes with a snack bar (and real bar and real barista coffee!) so you can poison yourself the minute you leave your island paradise. After two days of rain, camping, and midges I reward myself with mac and cheese as we sail off to the Isle of Canna. Because you cannot go back directly to Mallaig. We sail by the seaward side of Rum and the harshness of island life becomes much more apparent. A large commercial fishing boat has been wrecked on the cliffs, the hulk in clear view, and lives were lost. The waves and wind pick up. People kayak around here. When the weather is good, it is wonderful. However, the weather is never consistent. There are limited places to escape the waves, wind and current. How people in the past managed is a wonder, but they did because all these islands have been inhabited for millennia with all of them visiting each other and trading things from ever so far away.

We stop briefly at Canna. It is treeless. It has a few houses. It has a few boats in the harbour. Canna is the centre of crime. The local shop is run on the honour system. Not too long ago, someone stole the honour box to the tune of hundreds of dollars. Given the number of residents can be counted on two hands, and the number of itinerate yachts on a third, the suspect pool was tiny. The crime was never solved and left local people downhearted for a while. This sort of thing doesn’t happen here. They have since rallied. As I heard it, the honour box is back, confirming the way of life that they want.

Back to Mallaig and time to shift to another boat to go to Knoydart Peninsula. Not before I try to get an ice cream cone in town. I am thwarted by The Jacobite which has just dropped off an entire load of tourists. I know this because I had a sandwich at the Mission Café (not tuna mayonnaise). As I tried to leave, a huge woman and her entourage barged by me as they rushed to the Mission’s counter. The first thing many of the other Jacobite passengers would have done, and this would be many of the FAT ones, is run to the ice cream bar and queue up. I hasten to Jaffy’s Fish and Chips which also sells Mallaig kippers, smoked salmon, specialty foods, and ice cream. I cannot get through the door. Sometimes the karma bus decides “No ice cream for you.” This is just one of those days.

Probably a good thing, too, when the small boat to Knoydart takes only ten people and is bobbing around at the bottom of a concrete, slime and seaweed covered tiny staircase that is pitched at a forty-five degree angle. It is also manned by a crew that believes in self-help. As in, YOU want to take that damn bike and bags to our peninsula. YOU damn well better figure out how to get it down those slippery stairs and onto the boat. I do, but not without a lot of shouting, including the shouting in my head which is saying “If YOU want the bike and bags loaded a certain way, then YOU should get off your damn asses and load it.” Another shouting frenzy ensues when I slip, rocket down the stairs, topple the first mate, and take out two passengers.

Knoydart is a very unusual place. It is bordered on the south by Loch Nevis, on the north by Loch Hourn, west by the Sound of Sleet, and east by an unbelievable series of guardian mountains some over 1,000 metres. Knoydart’s claim to fame is: you can’t get there from here. Your first option is a thirty minute boat ride from Mallaig. The other is to walk over some challenging terrain, for twenty-five kilometres. The far western end once was croft land with families and sheep, supporting four families. The crofters were relocated to Mallaig and told to be fishermen, which they did. Over time, Knoydart was abandoned. Then, people started to come back. But not the people you think. As one resident says when asked how many of the people who live on Knoydart are natives or near natives, the answer is “None.” People come to Knoydart for the way of life which amounts to 125 people doing things to support themselves in various enterprises, including running the remotest pub in Scotland.

The Knoydart Peninsula is a community owned trust, a form of ownership that is more common than one would think in the Highlands. The trusts evolved when the hereditary estate owners no longer could, would, or wanted to manage the estates because they were too unprofitable, too debt ridden, or just too hard. Some communities pooled money and found other funds to buy the estates. One of the Small Islands, Eigg, is owned by a community trust. Knoydart is, too. A small part of Rum is emerging likewise. The community trusts pop up again and again and seem to have provided an opportunity for local stewardship, as well as plain ownership. The vibrancy of the community on Knoydart is quite remarkable. People live on Knoydart because they want to. They have developed a social network and local economy that is lively and forward looking. In one instance, the trust has reforested large sections of the peninsula and is developing a forestry industry. In another, small hospitality businesses have spring up.

One of those is the Snack Van. I get off the boat, where the crew hurls off my bags because they want to get to tea, and ride off to the Knoydart Bunkhouse which is overflowing with hikers. Knoydart has many Munros[5]. The bunkhouse caters primarily to those who want to clamber up them. Which explains, to a small degree, why next door to the bunkhouse in the middle of absolutely nowhere is the Snack Van which sells beef burgers, venison burgers, and chips. Since I was denied ice cream, I figure I will try a burger. The owner is a bubbly woman who tells me today she has sold four burgers. Yesterday she sold one. She doesn’t seem to care about the economics because, she says, she has some lovely conversations. We have a lovely conversation, too. She tells me all about a loop ride I can do if I ride from the village down to the end of the peninsula, cross a small stream, and then ride back on the trail along the coast. It sounds enchanting and the weather looks good. Why not?

Next day I am off. I get lost in the centre of town, hard to do since there is only one road and six buildings. The trail north finally makes itself known and is a rough but rideable road. For a few kilometres. Then it is just rough. The Munros, including Ladhar Bhein (1,020m), are spectacular with clouds covering their tops and only a slight drizzle. I bump my way along and come upon a sign that says: “Dave, Anne, Liam, and Michael welcome you to their farm. Please do not frighten the sheep.” I look six kilometres into the distance and see absolutely nothing but sheep. This is a family that wants to get away from it all.

The road has gotten so rough that I am walking. My bike and I are eight kilometres into this when we meet someone on the road who tells us how to cross the stream and that it should only be crossed at low tide. Huh? The family home appears on a hill with laundry blowing in the breeze just as, on the left, a kennel full of dogs start barking, howling, and slavering to get at my little bicycle legs. The stream is also on the left, past the dogs. The decision is either to go past the kennel and take my chances of getting eaten or turn back. I postulate the dogs can’t get out, and this is becoming something of an interesting adventure, especially when I get to the stream which is full of rocks, knee deep, six metres wide, and in flood.

Decision two is, having averted dog disaster, whether to go back or across this raging torrent all by myself with nobody to watch the body float out to sea. I press on and am rewarded with wet feet and a couple of hair raising “almost” stumbles. On the other side of the raging torrent, I am definitely not turning back now. I keep looking for the Snack Van lady’s road. I lower my expectations to bicycle track. Then, just track. What I find is a sheep path. Through bog. For those who are not familiar with how sheep travel, think drunken sailor. I am fourteen kilometres into this (halfway, of which eight kilometres has been pushing the bike). I keep pushing. At one point I push and the entire front wheel goes up to the axle in peat. At another point the trail peters out, I leave the bike to reconnoitre, and discover knee deep peat and wilderness. Then I cannot find the bike.

I sit. What person in their right mind would take bicycle trail advice from an unfit woman in a Snack Van? The only consolation is that someone before me has spoken to the Snack Van Lady because I pick up a bike tyre marking, accompanied by two stumbling footprints, in the peat ahead of me. Thank God because otherwise it was going to be a mindless slog along the coast or turning back. It is still a mindless slog for another four kilometres at which point I end up in someone’s yard. Not kidding. The trail appears to go through a yard. I open the gate to find a fellow who is working in his garden. He is laying down plastic to keep the weeds out. The plastic has hundreds of perfectly circular 8cm holes cut out where the plants will go. I ask him if he spent all winter cutting out the little holes which, it turns out, he did.

A rough road presents itself after I go out the other end of the front yard garden. In it stand a herd of cattle. I try “shoo.” It works. I toodle along through increasingly more populated areas, meaning one house, two house. They look across the Sound of Sleat to Skye and the Cuillins. The view from here sears your soul. The End of the Road Café appears, which is closed. When the owner sees my woeful face (she is painting the floor), she asks if I want tea and cake? The “Yes” is hard to make out from the whimpering. It is great tea and the cake is chocolate. She is full of stories of the community, including the four hours of light they get in the winter and the community gatherings they have every week to play board games and visit. She came from Czechoslovakia and earned her Captain’s ticket in Mallaig, enduring many comments about the likelihood that a woman from a landlocked country would ever manage to do all the required practical boat driving in Scotland’s high and windy seas. Complete it she did and got a job as a boat captain driving in these hellish waters. Sadly after a year she was made redundant, only to be replaced by the charming boat crew whose acquaintance I made.

The rest of the ride is increasingly glorious as the track becomes a tarmac road and winds along a high overlook of Loch Nevis. The sun comes out. I ride by a dam that is used as a town water source and does appear to have some kind of water quality treatment. Shocker. The Snack Van is closed for the day so supper is a communal bunkhouse affair with stories from all the Munro baggers.

This is not hiking as I know it. You take your compass or GPS. You pick a mountain. You walk up it. There are no trails. Notice I did not mention map. Lack of same has become a real bone of contention in hiking and rescue circles, in part because people are getting lost when their GPS batteries run out. Two of my roommates are older gents who have been bagging all the Munros and are like two little kids in their enthusiasm for the endeavour. We laugh hysterically when they share the latest warnings, published in three newspapers and by the government no less, telling hikers not to rely on their GPS devices as the sole means of navigation in the wilderness. Amongst other hazards, hikers have been known to get so fixated on their GPS that they walked right off a cliff. In others, hikers forget that their GPS devices, having been designed for horizontal use, are sensitive only to five metre vertical variations. Surprise!

The boys tell me of 282 Munros they have only fourteen left. I ask, “Then what?” They both have a deer in the headlights look to them which makes me realise what an unkind question that is. They start emoting, not convincingly, about the joys of Corbetts (762m to 914.4m) and Grahams (609.6m to 762m). It is definitely not kind to tell them I waved at them from the road on my cycle adventure du jour (or du bog), and I am slightly hurt that they did not wave back. They both apologise profusely before they remember they were in the clouds all day (and nobody except Superman could see them). They were on the other side of the peninsula to boot. They retaliate by smirking and asking if I am going over the Ratagan Pass.





CHAPTER XV. Skye and Glenelg





Off to the transportation hub of Mallaig to pick up the ferry to the Isle of Skye. Or, the Tourist Trap of Skye. Skye is crawling with buses, cars, and people all of whom cram onto the ferry. In a half hour, the ferry arrives in the hamlet of Armadale, self-sustained by tourist retail. When I was last here, the ferry was a landing craft with no buildings in sight. I camped overnight on the beach waiting for its morning run. Down the road is the Clan Donald Skye Visitor Centre, a giant edifice with the architectural integrity of Kinloch Castle. Parking lot full of coach buses and caravans, it is doing a whopping trade. It did not exist when I was here before. Even for tea and cake you can’t get me inside.

I move on quickly, in part, because I have no place to stay. I need to find one. There is a bunkhouse, the Flora MacDonald, which after much wandering around and a climb up a high hill, I locate. It is sold out. I am getting bolder, though, and ask, “How about I pitch my tent? How much would that be?” The warden is stunned that I even ask. He calls the owner who says, “£5.” For this I still have the run of the lounge area, the shower and toilet, plus the kitchen. I quietly bless this man because it is late. This is my only option. Accommodation on Skye is a challenge, as evidenced by the endless stream that knock on the Flora MacDonald’s door and, tentless, are turned away. This place also has entertainment.

The first source of entertainment is the young Japanese tour group that has taken over most of Flora’s. I get the distinct feeling they are absolutely clueless about why they are on Skye other than they should be because it is a top tourist destination. Most of them have been eating takeaway for their entire tour. The second source is that the bunkhouse owner raises Eriskay ponies. The breed comes from the Island of Eriskay which is one of the Outer Hebridean islands. How did ponies get to the Hebrides? Think shipwreck. The breed changes colour as it ages. The foals are born black and turn white with age, just like the Lipizzans. The owner and I have a lovely chat about his hobby herd.

Later as I sit drinking my tea, the ponies come racing up from the field below with a stallion in the lead. They congregate at the fence which is five metres from the windows of the bunkhouse. The stallion then decides to have his way with one mare who could appear less interested as she continues to chew grass. And he has his way again. And again. And on, and on, and on. He is still at it when I go to bed. When I get up the next day, the mare is still chewing grass. The stallion is still at it and looks like he was run over by a bus. His legs are bowed. His head is drooping. His eyes are glazed over. He is stumbling trying to get back at that mare. Is there a human metaphor here?

The young Japanese tour group are bamboozled. Most of them have never seen a pony and, I would venture, none of them have seen raw animal sex. I leave before they get up, missing whether theirs eyes are as equally glazed over from this brush with rural living, and head off to Broadford, land of a Post Office and a parcel. The road along the southern coast of Skye has been widened and made into a serious thoroughfare, which is a shame since the previous one track road was incredibly charming and can still be seen. The new road is soulless. The exception is the view across the Sound of Sleat to Knoydart where I can follow my entire “bike push bog trip.”

I pass Sbhal Mòr Ostaig. This was not here before, either. It is a College and National Centre for Gaelic Language and Culture. The College provides residential and distance-learning. I find this oddly heartening. If I wanted, I could learn Gaelic and lots of people are. Amidst all this horrible touristy stuff is a new cultural jewel. It is one of the aspects of this trip that is becoming more remarkable to me, this growth in Scottish culture and accessibility to it. Perhaps because the boys have stopped fighting, I think, as I pass Knock Castle, a 14th century ruin that went from MacLeods to MacDonalds to James 1 with the MacLeods after it again, finally becoming a stone source for other building projects in the 1600’s. While the new road is rideable, the scenery is limited especially when the road heads inland at Isleornsay. Many kilometres through bog are not exciting although I can occasionally glance Skye’s Cuillin Mountains in the distance. The road then intersects Skye’s main thoroughfare, a death-trap. This dual carriageway is filled with buses, trucks, and tourist cars. In addition, it has kerbing for several kilometres up to Broadford. For a bicycle, this means no margin of safety at all. I push.

Broadford is a one kilometre strip mall complete with Reptile Centre. It’s a mix of touristy retail and real life retail. For example, it has a big Coop which carries lots of food. I stock up and manage to get enough food on my bike that I can live for a bit since it is relatively unclear where the next food stop is. I am noticing looooong spaces between shops these days. The Post Office parcel also proves to have some much needed food packages. Even with all this food joy, I find Broadford a soulless place. I’m also starting to feel unwell. Probably just tired and not very uplifted by the ride this morning. I’m glad to head out of town, where the main road east becomes even more perilous as it narrows. I very much want to head to Glenelg with its two excellent Iron Age Brochs. However, the road there goes over a 279 metre pass the far side of which has arrows on my map. I could go to Kyle of Lochalsh and would, given how I feel. But the traffic is only getting worse. I narrowly miss getting wiped out by a dump truck. When the Glenelg turnoff presents itself, I take it even though the map shows a long steady climb that promises a nose bleed. Better than roadkill.

It is a long climb of eight kilometres. The traffic is limited because the road terminates at a small ferry that can manage only four cars. When I finally reach the top of the pass, the view is of Kyle Rhea, a narrow sea channel connecting northerly Loch Alsh to the Sound of Sleat. Even from this vantage point, the raging tidal current is obvious. It looks like someone pulled the plug out of a 10th story bathtub. I see the ferry crab its way across the Kyle, making slow progress.

The road down is incredibly steep. This means, once again, either listening to brakes that sound like banshees or walking to keep myself and my twenty-six kilograms load from rocketing uncontrollably off the side of the mountain. Walking with that spectacular view is just fine. Half way down we start the long coast to wherever we are going. It takes me, very quickly, to a park. From the signage it appears to be a special park. It is indeed. Aside from the obligatory otter signs, and once again how to tell the difference, is a whiteboard where people have written what they have seen today. The “75 seals and 2 sea eagles” piques my interest.

Time for tea. It is sunny, cold and windy. Tea is at one of several picnic benches, all outfitted with a metal plate on which to put your stove so that you will not incinerate said picnic bench. Since I have not seen this arrangement anywhere, the metal plate installation argues strongly for a past conflagration. Perhaps they knew I was coming? Fifty metres above the Kyle, the view is of the torrent below with an array of Munros in the background. Invisibly nestled amongst them is the Ratagan Pass. It all looks very daunting. This is a major estuarine area with all that implies: molluscs, fish, seals, sea eagles, and a cornucopia of other birds. Otters, too (HA!). I am not feeling too flash but the tea and view have rejuvenated me. My survival bells and whistles also have initiated an adrenaline flow as I more closely watch the ferry and its volunteers not get sucked out to sea. Just. I am not going back up that hill. The only way is down. Muttering a prayer for a change in the tide that will make the crossing less life threatening, I tidy up.

Two hikers come up to me and say “It’s YOU! It’s YOU!” This is a puzzle because I have never met them in my life. They were high up Sgùrr na Coinnich, the 739 metre mountain down whose flank I have just ridden. They saw my yellow Big Bird jacket and wondered what it was. Perhaps one of the cornucopia? I explain that the jacket is a visibility enhancement so that mountain rescue can find me when I go crashing off a cliff. It is heartening to know they have seen me from so far away. Especially good since I now realise that I am totally knackered. Instead of carrying on, I head up an unmarked forest track towards Otter Haven, with its Otter Hide, to find a wild camping spot and collapse. Since the flanks of Sgùrr na Coinnich are equally steep here, it is a fool’s errand. Finally, I pitch the tent in the middle of the forest road. I hope nobody will run me over in the middle of the night. I discover a nice waterfall to wash in. Exhaustion and another swarm of midges drive me to an early bed.

Next day finds me in the Otter Hide (the building not the skin) looking for otters, of which there are none. Seals there are. I count to 125 and stop counting. Seals are in the water. I see seals doing all kinds of synchronised swimming together in circles, in bigger loops, then breaking off and forming new dancing units. Seals are on the rocks, so many that it is hard to see the rocks. I am on the side of the mountain and use my binoculars to see their eyes and whiskers. I do. Best £16 I have spent in a long time. Meanwhile, a sea eagle goes careening overhead, one of a mating pair living here. With a 2.5m wingspan it casts a shadow like an A380. The bird hide at the beginning of the park is open and is full of expensive optics, which the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds makes available for anyone who wants to look through. The docent, who is guarding the thousands of dollars’ worth of binoculars, is eager to have me look for birds. I tell him I am looking for otters. The look on his face tells me I am on another fool’s errand. Using an expensive telescope, I look back from whence I have come, all along the Kyle, longingly hoping an otter will appear. No such luck.

I have never seen so much marine wildlife in one place. It is teeming. This for once answers what the Neolithic folks were doing here and why their Iron Age successors built brochs or stone apartment houses. The food supply would have been endless, including agricultural products grown and husbanded in the fertile fields across the way. As I look down from the bird hide, feeling slightly worse than the day before, I see the ferry. The tidal race has abated a bit. I coast down and put my life in the hands of the local volunteer ferrymen.

The MV Glenachulish is the last operating manual turntable ferry in the world. This information only raises the question of why has everyone else in the world abandoned this technology, including the third world? The crossing is only 600m. I get on board and hope we shove off soon because then maybe the barking ferry dog will shut up. As with most ferries, I am amazed at how the loaders take their lives in their hands guiding the inexperienced on board. The ferry is docked kitty-corner to the wharf because otherwise the current would rip it off the stanchions. The crossing is exciting because we crab against the current the entire way and dock on the far side at a forty-five degree angle to the dock. I wait, ready to push the barking dog overboard, and watch to see how many of the tourist cars will end up in the drink. One “almost” is very exciting since the driver cannot get his head around the need to drive off the ferry at a forty-five degree angle as opposed to straight off the end.

On to Glenelg. Passing Neolithic cairns and a beach overwhelmed by caravans, I carry on around the corner on a road the size of your driveway. It follows the Glenmore River, which winds sinuously through a large marshland. In the far distance is Knoydart and Ladhar Bheinn. On my right is Skye. This is another world. But what is that three story stone building doing here? A small pedestrian bridge crosses the river and heads towards the stone building but the extent of the marsh and the weight of my bike argue against this shortcut. Instead, I circumnavigate the marshland and end up at the Glenelg & Arnisdale Community Hall where I learn that the stone buildings (there are multiples) are the Bernera Barracks. The English built them between 1717 and 1723 to house the force that would police the Jacobite sympathisers who lived here, pretty much everyone. The barracks are ugly and, as I am becoming a Scotophile, insulting to my new cultural sensibilities. I give them a miss.

The Community Hall is another story. The building is open and provides services, including used book exchange, information brochures, and “Glory, Glory, Hallelujah” showers. The current trip plan is to ride up Gleann Beag with its two well preserved brochs, chambered cairns, cup marked stone, hut circle, tumuli, and nothingness. Then, find a spot to camp amidst the archaeology and see if it resonates here, too. Since a shower is not in the cards for several nights, I stop and take advantage. In goes the £2. On comes the hot water. What they did not mention is that once you get under the shower and soaped up, the hot water stops. The source water is from a well with arctic associations. £8 and a lot of cursing later, I am semi-clean, hypothermic and grumpy. Off to the very expensive pub in this lovely village, the gateway to Iron Age heaven and beyond. The pub food measures up but the advertised bike shop is an empty garage with a “Call Me” number on it and not up to the repairs I need. I head off to the brochs.

Gleann Beag is less open than Glen More, the main valley with the road to the Ratagan Pass. Glean Beag’s steep slopes guard alluvial fields on both sides of the river. As I ride east, I feel enveloped in a comforting way. This glen is very defensible with access only from the east and west. Perhaps this is why it has been inhabited for millennia and why its inhabitants, sometime between 1200BC and 600BC, built Dun Telve. Dun Telve is a broch, an Iron Age apartment house. There are lots of brochs in Scotland. The two in Gleann Beag are particularly well preserved. As with all archaeology unaccompanied by written history, the purpose of brochs is unclear. Some experts maintain they were forts. Others, that they were castles, defensive structures, or offensives structures. The puzzle here is there are two within a kilometre of each other.

I come to Dun Telve, open a small gate, and walk in. Before me is a drystone tower of eighteen metres in diameter with small door and rock lintel. The door was either built for people much smaller than I or, my suspicions, so that admission was for single entrance and in a position too awkward to hold a spear or axe. I figure if the experts can’t come up with a definitive interpretation, I am allowed to speculate as well. The ground floor is dirt and would have been a good place for communal goings on around a fire. I don’t think this broch had a roof but some believe they did. What we all agree on is that this broch is a marvel of engineering. The rocks are drystone, meaning no mortar. They were carefully placed and balanced to construct this building which today stands ten metres high, five thousand years later. The broch was most likely higher before the stones were appropriated for local construction, including the Bernera Barracks. The two concentric walls with massive stones provide platforms, upper level floors, and wall separation. How did they get these stones to this site and in place? It is easy to see people conducting daily chores downstairs and sleeping upstairs, living here safe and sound. It takes no imagination at all.

Feeling feverish, I toy with the idea of violating the wild camping Bill of Rights and plunking my tent right on this historic grassy spot surrounded by trees, river, and broch. In a fit of civic responsibility, I mount up and head further up Gleann Beag. I come to Dun Troddan but am just too unwell to climb up the short hill to visit. A totally random gypsy tea caravan materialises around the corner. I know I am in trouble when I don’t want cake. Time to find a place to settle for the night. I head off for the next ruins which are Dun Grugaig (a semi-broch), hut circles, and tumuli where the dead are buried. I pass the last farm on the road and keep heading east. I ford a small stream that looks to be free of sheep poo, push up a small rise and find a hut circle, tumuli, and a grassy knoll. I stumble back to the stream and filter water. Then I pitch the tent, crawl in, and collapse.

It’s not just the Neolithic dead who are buried here. I am about to be. I wake up with a raging upper respiratory infection, the sounds of my hacking up a lung echo through the empty valley. One day of my life is spent in delirium.

Day two doesn’t go too well, either. Being the next tumulus is looking appealing. Maybe the random walkers who pass by will do the honours. I am thinking “Tent tumulus” for the modern age. I look out my little tent window to the river below and see all kinds of broch-like rocks, some of them very large. At least I know where they got the rocks from.

Day three. I wake up surrounded by sheep. So much for the no sheep poo theory of water quality. I should have figured it out from the grassy fields that were cropped to within one centimetre of the dirt. I go out and chase them off, taking a short walk up to Dun Grugaig. Really bad idea. I barely make it back.

Day four. I am not staying here for another day. The problem is there is no way out of here other than…over the Ratagan Pass. What the hell. I am going to die anyway. On the way out of the valley I stop at broch Dun Trodden. I arrive inside the broch to find, right dead centre on a rock tablet, a giant pile of fresh human poo. Clearly someone with a high fibre diet. The only other option is that it is giant dog poo. But giant it is, and it is definitely poo. I am dumb struck. How did it get here? And why? Maybe a mystical sign to warn me off the Ratagan Pass? The Gypsy Tea Van is also closed. Bad juju all around.

I stop at the Glenelg Community Hall to see if they have fixed the hot water in the shower because I am now officially leaving fumes behind me as I ride. They are not fooling me this time, although they clearly fooled someone else because there is £20 worth of credit on the shower machine. I turn the tap on and wait, and wait, and wait. Lots of arctic water. Oh well, maybe I can put a match to the fumes and get some kind of jet propulsion effect. Off we go. The strategy is: be a tortoise and go slow. The map indicates that if I collapse at any time, I can crawl off to the side of the road. There will be a flat enough spot to pitch my tent. The sun is out, but there are whispers of ground fog. The view begins to broaden out with steep hills on both sides. The valley floor of Glen More is a lush green. A great day for a funeral.

Up, up, stop. Up, up, stop. But the stopping is really glorious. First, I get to survey the military road that runs parallel and occasionally is part of this one. English generals in the 18th century got their jollies out of building military roads. Aside from these usually being through places that had no roads before, the engineers invariably made them straight even when straight might not have been easier to build. This one is as straight as an arrow until it veers left, goes over the pass, and on to Shiel Bridge. Building it is what kept those boys at the barracks busy. Second, I get to ponder the hills on my right which are the backside of the valley where I spent the three nights in my tent amongst the aura of the Neolithic. This current valley has none of that aura or archaeology because, I hypothesise, it is much more exposed and much more accessible. It also has an amazingly gradual, regular grade. Roads over passes seem to have one side that is long and gradually angled and one side that is precipitous. Since I can’t pick which one I want, I try not to look too hard at the maps when I am headed somewhere. It is clear, though, that today may not be funeral day because it is not even midday and I have gone eight kilometres, only a few short of the pass.

I stop for a long break before the summit and watch as a golden eagle flies overhead. Maybe my luck is changing. Even if it isn’t, it’s been a beautiful day although I must admit, I am sad to leave the area. Magical place. The Ratagan Pass is cloaked in very cold clouds. Known also as the Mam Ratagan or Bealach Ratagan, the road summits at 350m. Over the top and then the precipitous drop down, but not so precipitous that it involves walking. For a distraction is a whole crowd of bike riders, aged forty-five+, who are headed up the Ratagan Pass and who have no idea what they have gotten themselves into. They are part of a paid tour group that after a hearty lunch with beer and wine, were given bikes, pushed onto the road, and told they would be met in Glenelg. Some of them are starting to wonder why they paid for the privilege. Even at this low point, they are strung out over three kilometres. Most of them are cheery, but that won’t last long. If the ride straight up doesn’t kill them, the hypothermia at the top will because it is starting to rain.

I coast down to a Youth Hostel only to find that it is run like a real Youth Hostel where they expect you to be a busy bee entertaining yourself all day. It doesn’t open until 5pm. I opt for the local campground at Shiel Bridge, a hot shower that goes on forever, two loads of laundry, and my tent.





CHAPTER XVI. Glen Shiel and Torridons





With Munros surrounding Shiel Bridge and Munro baggers tending towards cheaper accommodation, the campground has a high tent vs. caravan population. I have pitched my tent on the only available square metre of space. After a night hacking up the other lung, I have driven all the tent residents mad. I stick my head out at noon and find I am a plague victim, isolated in the field. Everyone has moved far, far away. Works for me.

Semi-exhausted I wander 500 metres along the main road to the pub. Huge lorries, bicycle gangs, and speeding cars test the limits of centrifugal force as they fly around the forty-five degree bend. A hefty guardrail has no hope of stopping any trucks from launching into the Shiel River below. A big chunk of exposed rock is another story, with scrapes, chinks, and colours testifying to an exciting history. Unfortunately, this is the only road out of town. The walk to the Kintail Lodge Hotel involves a pathway that gets narrower as the cliff on the right gets larger. The distance between the lorries and me can be measured in millimetres. Instead of imminent automotive death, I fixate on Loch Duich and its surrounding mountains, pure wildness.

The Kintail Lodge has a large parking lot into which I scurry and discover the Wee Bunk House. “Wee” is an understatement. Located smack in the middle of the parking lot is a tiny building that must have been a garden shed in a previous life. It is now a bunkhouse, through whose windows I peer to see what attraction this lodging might have for me. None. I am so glad I am in my tent. The food at the Kintail makes up for it. I don’t think I have eaten a decent meal in six days. I don’t think I ate yesterday at all. I make up for it, here, and take in the local goings-on. Being the only outpost for kilometres, there is no shortage of families celebrating, drinkers drinking, and barkeeps shouting and teasing everyone, including me.

I pack and leave at dawn. Even at 5am this is a busy route. I hate busy roads. I am not looking forward to this. I pedal like mad along what vacillates amongst the depressingly commercial, the life threatening, and the awesome, including another sea eagle sighting, this one for real. The Eileen Dornan Castle, in its 13th century glory, is closed at 6am. When it does open, its parking lot will be full of coach bus tours and visitors headed to Skye. The castle is a classic Scottish view, even nicer from the empty parking lot. With the traffic picking up, I take a quick ride around Dornie, an attractive small village that, even next to the castle site, has managed to retain its non-tourist integrity. Then past a bakery (closed) and then another bakery on the outskirts of town (OPEN!). A chunk of fresh baked roll brightens the morning. I reach the Auchtertyre turnoff to Stromeferry, no longer a ferry, and the route north.

After climbing out of the valley, a parking lot presents itself. In it are cars. Several of them. The occupants are sitting there, looking at their laps and not at the spectacular view over Loch Alsh. My first impression is: drugs. Since they closed all the laundromats which used to be the drug supermarkets, where else could the drug dealers go? After thirty minutes, though, nobody comes and nobody leaves. Sleuth-like, I sidle over to one of the cars and see the woman inside it texting. Texting? Same for car number two. Because of the topography, mobile service is very spotty in the Highlands. Thus, people drive to the nearest high point, sit in their cars, and conduct their communication. This theme becomes more and more pronounced the further north I go, with some scenic site viewing points more populated with texting locals than tourist cars. It is nice to know that the investment in tourism is providing a win-win opportunity for the locals.

The road passes the old Stromferry turnoff and a viewing point, at which I stop. This high vantage overlooks Loch Carron and Strome Castle. Built and owned by various members of the MacDonald clan, the castle is a picturesque ruin. It is difficult to get a good view given the two tour buses that pull up and eject tourists who elbow their way to the front. I wait for one of them to go over the edge to reward me for my patience but come up empty. Truly, though, the issue for once is not the tourists. It is: “How did two huge tour buses get up this road, which is single track.” What is the company policy on cyclists? Given one of the buses is headed my way, I am about to find out.

The company policy is: cyclists be damned. I hasten to beat the bus only to find the bus tailgating me. It must not take long for eighty people to stop and soak up beauty. There is no place for me to pull over so we ride along in companionable silence. Me coasting down a small grade and the bus bumper pushing me from behind. At a small widening, I pull over and then watch as the bus speeds up, takes a hairpin turn, its back end sweeping the pavement clear of everything in its way – road markers, trees, and (thankfully) not me. Once again the traffic picks up because the further north one goes, “you can’t get there from here.” Rather, you can only get there on this tiny road be you cyclist, bus, or tractor trailer. In my peripheral vision I see a well maintained high stone wall and a right hand turn into something that looks like a tourist site. Survival instinct kicks in. I turn right.

It is a tourist site. Attadale House. Delightfully perched in the middle of landscaped fields and woods, the 1755 house is not the main attraction since they won’t let you in. It is the gardens. I am not much of a garden person. I like to look at the plants but have trouble telling a rose from a water lily. These gardens are my favourite of all time because aside from the thematic organisation over twenty acres, there are sculpture lurking. When least expected, a sculpture pops up and superb sculpture it is, too. So much so that the garden map gives equal billing to the horticulture and the art. The map, however, does not lend precision to exactly where each piece is. One has to go looking for it. It is a scavenger hunt on grand proportions and great fun. I manage to find all the pieces except the roe deer which is frustratingly hidden at the edge of a field as deer, of course, tend to be. It is here that I see my first otter, too. A lovely sculpture that captures everything I have read in the otter brochures.

Back onto the main road and pedalling like mad through a small tunnel where everyone driving is mightily annoyed about the washout that has made parts of the road one way. One way means if there is a cyclist on the road, that cyclist is invisible. Invisible me makes it all the way down to sea level, after climbing and descending a 14% hill, and pulls off at the first refreshment spot I see, the Carron Restaurant. Rather, the only refreshment spot I have seen in thirty kilometres. I have now made it through a really long stretch completely supermarketless, eating whatever was in the food bag and freeze dried camping meals. Oatmeal is losing its charm. The thought of a real meal is intoxicating. The greeting sign at the door says: “Welcome to Rural Scotland where the quality of water is not what you might find elsewhere. Drink at your peril.” Who cares? I will have beer instead.

This mom and pop restaurant is run by a personable crew who not only produce great food but are entertaining conversationalists. I unleash my eating strategy of “Can we just start with these three things, keep the bill open, and I will continue ordering until I am full?” The owner laughs and takes it all in stride. The food comes in waves including the best Cullen skink (a soup made of smoked haddock), salad, delectable poached salmon with smashed potatoes, vegetables, and – after a brief lull – pudding with cream. I stagger out the door to quiet applause, get back on the bike, and start looking for a place to stay that does not look like a campground since I have been in my tent for a week.

No such luck. The Strathcarron Hotel is full. It is the only game in town. Turning right, I head towards the next bunkhouse which is eight kilometres away without realising this road goes to Inverness, the centre of the Highland Universe. Any road that goes to Inverness is busy. Bad enough. This one has drivers who are in a rush. In the first kilometre two sports cars pass at 140kph and one tractor trailer drives me off the road. From my refuge in the heather, across the road I spy woods. On the far side of the woods lies the River Carron, a salmon river. I assume it is behind these woods. The tent is looking safer. I cross the street, find a dirt track, and head off into the sylvan darkness.

There are times when I am pushing my bike through these woodlands that I consider the possibility that if I trip and skull myself, nobody is every going to find me. Because nobody knows I am here. This heightens the sense of adventure. It also makes me keep my EPRB handy. The trees get closer and the road gets darker. I move onto serial killers and rapists. Then the road becomes slightly more of a road and opens up onto the River Carron, a fast flowing, wide and wild salmon river. I discover a park bench which seems incredibly odd. The banks of rivers, as they tend to be here, are boggy, but there is a patch dry enough to pitch the tent. Then off to the river to get water, probably the same water used at the restaurant. When I arrive at water’s edge and look upstream, I see a picture postcard view of mountains in the background and salmon stream running towards me. It is going to be a lovely night.

It is also a lovely morning with the same view made more spectacular by the bright sunlight. I follow the river south, since I know the dirt track comes out to a main road at some point. Several kilometres later I stumble into yet another yard, this of a holiday let. I move quickly past the games room, down the driveway, and to the intersection of the road to Inverness. Instead of heading towards Inverness, lesson learnt, I go left to Lochcarran and, hopefully, a road less travelled by.

Lochcarron is a bustling town that has managed to keep its local character in spite of the tourism industry. It has a Coop where I stock up on food. But before I arrive in downtown Lochcarron, I make several stops along the way. I stop at an active church and graveyard to investigate, read the stones, and get a sense of the place. Lochcarron has a history of stonemasonry. The stones are large, numerous, and a bit more elaborate than one would usually find. Stone envy. The stories are what captivate me although they are brief, since cutting letters in stone is expensive.

A bit further on is an abandoned church and graveyard. In it is a remarkable stone, a waist high round obelisk. On it is carved testimony to a local teacher and his wife. The inscription covers the entire obelisk. To this day I regret not having taken a photo because of the gratitude, the power, and the sense of loss the words communicated about a couple who had made their life’s work their now grieving, loving family and their community. It brought to life the role that people play here and the fabric of relationships and reputation they wove, and continue to weave, in these small communities.

Morning tea is at the golf course which welcomes visitors, as most do. The Victoria sponge is delightful. Golf is everywhere, but the course challenge varies. Here it is somewhat groomed greens with everything else in its natural state. The golf club is a small affair, but they have Wi-Fi and books for sale. I stock up on new books, leave a couple of my own, and continue on to town. Advertised is a kilt factory on a dead end road, actually the opposite half of the Stromferry Road. Hut circles are meant to be high on the roadside hill. The sun is out. Off to the kilt factory.

Rather, the “suck in the tourists” kilt retail outlet. No fleecing, carding, dying or weaving going on here. The prices are staggering. You need a kilt, sporran, socks, special shoes, a knife or two, fancy shirt, accessories and, perhaps, a hat. Underwear optional. I added up the various pieces in my head and came up to £2,000. Overcome, since this is more than my monthly budget, I flop down on the sofa in the back of the shop and ask where all the kilt demonstrations are? One poor attendant fesses up that, well, we really don’t make anything here. We just sell it. But we have videos of kilts being made and things Scottish. Would I like to watch the videos? Damn Skippy I would. So I sit on the sofa while the entire staff hunts down videos and gets the TV working. I watch an hour of people in kilts being shoved off their land and, in between, instructive videos on the various dyes and history of the kilt.

Originally, kilts were no more than a long strip of woollen fabric wrapped around its owner like a toga. To stay truly warm, said owner would soak his kilt in water at night, wring it out, and then sleep in the sodden mess. The idea was that cocooned like this, the material was warmer because the fibres would swell and keep out the wind. How the entire male population of ancient Scotland did not die of hypothermia, or how their sperm counts were not reduced to zero from this practice, is a mystery the videos do not explore. It does, however, explain where whiskey came from and why they drink so much of it because only in an inebriated stupor could a sane person wrap themselves in wet, cold wool. I wonder if the Pictish Blue that the Scots are said to have painted themselves in battle was not the actual colour of their skin from a night of this. The shop attendants are no help in alleviating my ignorance on the point. I entertain myself further by going through the racks to try and find the cheapest clan to belong to is (never solved) and marvel at the children’s complete kilt outfits that go for £1,000.

As I return to Lochcarron, I see the hut circles high on the hill. I am not going up there. However, their location provides more confirmation that my emerging theory of where Neolithic people lived is not totally insane. Here they are high up so they could see the opposition coming. These hut circles are also located next to a stream and overlooking Loch Carron, teaming with fish including salmon, other marine life, deer, birds, and broad fields along the loch that could be gleaned for edibles or farmed. I am ready to glean for edibles, too, and head back to Lochcarron for tea and cake before deciding to head out of town over another pass to Sanachan which does not show up on any map but is meant to be on the main (and only) road. It has a bunkhouse, if I can find it. After an hour of up and over, more breathtaking beauty, and finally a sense of getting away from it all because only one truck passes, I find the Sanachan Bunkhouse. After banging on the door, a face appears and shows me a lovely bunkroom that is all for me since nobody else has booked.

It’s a great place. The young owner and his partner decided to give it a go as a sideline to their existing employment. Because it is their own home, it has an intimate feel about it. She does some kind of adventuring and is away today abseiling and kayaking. He sells a special type of European farm equipment and is very interested and articulate about the Brexit vote. I hadn’t been very aware of the vote’s impact on small business owners but am well-educated by the time I leave. I now understand why the Scots want to remain part of the EU. The potential economic impact of Brexit to them is huge.

“Not on the map” Sanachan also boasts the Kishorn Seafood Bar. How this restaurant came to be here is a yet another mystery. Aside from the bunkhouse and a tiny art gallery, there is nothing in Sanachen, including people. South is water. West and north are...nothing. The Kishorn Seafood Bar also closes at 5pm, not prime time restaurant hours. It is 4pm. My last eating frenzy was so successful that I decide to try and replicate it. The sun filled cosy dining area is empty. The proprietors and I go through the same routine at the counter: I will order this and keep ordering until I keel over. The seafood keeps coming and the only disappointment is that squat lobster, my new favourite, is unavailable. I don’t miss them for too long as smoked this and that as well as fresh oysters, clams, prawns, scallops, and fish are brought in abundance until I groan “enough.” The beer is good, too. Since the Kishorn is two doors down from the bunkhouse, I blunder back and crawl into bed.

Next morning, I realise the character of the land has changed. I have moved into the true northern Highlands. “A” roads tend to have two lanes but not always. “B” roads tend to be paved, but not always. Tracks are well-worn and often bikeable because many are historical thoroughfares. They will never be upgraded to an automotive road and are intriguing options. Buildings are scarce and people scarcer. Here, the feeling of space and remoteness is palpable.

The traffic is a bit of a challenge, though, since the creation of the North Coast 500 (NC500). The North Coast 500 is a mythical route brought to you by a commercial enterprise looking to beef up tourist visits in Northern Scotland. The idea is to drive 500 miles (yes, it is 516 miles long) to the furthest flung and more remote parts of Scotland, spending money as you go. Some of the marketing claims are laughable, including one that you can walk the North Coast 500. You can, of course, if you choose to risk your life walking along single track roads being driven simultaneously by foreign tourists in huge rented motor homes. As for cycling the same route, even less appealing. But the existence of the North Coast 500 does help my route planning. Everyone I see is headed to the NC500. Seeking quiet, I plan to avoid it.

The road from Sanachan is, sadly, on the NC500 necessitating another early departure. Less than two kilometres down the road appears a churchy kind of place with a gate and not much of a sign. I see two people leaving, park the bike, and go through the gate. A tiny sign says “Courthill Chapel,” and I find a matching tiny church. Built in 1901, the church is attractive, even endearing. It is a truly personal monument, built by Lady Murray of Courthill as a memorial to her four year old daughter, her son Alasdair killed in the Boer War, and her husband, all of whom she survived. I can’t imagine bearing that tragedy but building this chapel was, hopefully, cathartic. It is a totally unexpected treasure in my travels. She might be pleased to know the chapel is still actively used for services and well cared for.

A kilometre down the road is the Tornapress intersection where the NC500 turns left for Bealach Na Bà, the toughest cycle climb in Scotland. This alpine Tour de France look-a-like rises 626 metres in ten kilometres, with gradients hitting 20%. The views from it are said to be spectacular. The road conditions are horrendous, with hairpin bends and signs telling learner drivers to take the alternative route. The road is so narrow caravans are banned. The other cycling option is to go straight. This route heads to the Torridons, through several kilometres of rural splendour. The straight road rises slowly to 130 metres with a long gradual run down into Shieldaig. Guess which way I am going?

But first, tea at the newish tea house/gallery that is sporting an antique MG convention in the parking lot. Guess which way they are going? After taking my order, the owner lets her big, barking dog into the dining area where the beast promptly runs over to me, shedding hair everywhere. It puts its drooling jowls on my bare leg, leaving a pool of saliva on my shoe. I beat it over the head with my map yelling, “No, No, No.” The owner glares. My tea is slammed down in front of me. The owner finally hauls the dog off and deposits it in front of a more receptive client. The gallery is quite nice, though. I admire the art works, compliment the owner, run by the slobbering dog, and head on my way.

This is such a fantastic cycling road, everything the map promised. Sometimes the maps do not pick ups and downs that are crammed close together, presenting some rude riding surprises. They got it right this time. No traffic, to boot. At the crest, the road flattens out with beautiful moorland on the left, several very big mountains in front, and a large granite ridge on the right separating this road from Lochcarron. Glasnock House ahead is on beautiful Loch an Lòin with a dip in the hills behind it that belies a mountain pass to the other side. The dotted line on the map indicates a historical route, perhaps even cyclable were I interested in returning to Lochcarron. The small loch flows into the much larger Loch Damh which quickly disappears as the road bends left into Glensheildaig Forest, a typical Scottish forest with no trees. After a rise, the downward coast begins. The next four kilometres require minimal pedalling while looking at a lovely burn alongside. Trees appear on the shores of Loch Dìughaill as does the NC500, re-joining the main road with traffic that increases exponentially. I zip into Shieldaig, a hamlet with a store, a café jammed to the rafters with tourists, and a chance to get out of the wind and warm up. A verra satisfying ride indeed.

Across the street I see a tourist boat headed to Shieldaig Island with its Sea Eagle attraction. As it departs I am reminded of Victory at Sea because the white capped waves are that big. Any bird is hunkered down in its nest. Any mammalian wildlife is hiding in its den. I would take bets that those on board are going to have a hard time keeping down the advertised seafood lunch. I am rewarded for my unchristian thoughts by a really steep climb out of Shieldaig on my way to Torridon.

The topography is changing with wide open spaces, granite to the right of me, granite to the left of me, and really big mountains ahead. The big mountains are the Torridan Hills, which at 1,055 metres qualify as mountains to me. The odd aspect of the Torridons is that they are sandstone. Thus, instead of being rock that has been thrust up, the Torridons are what has remained when the rest has eroded away. Although, granted, they were much higher to begin with, an estimated seven kilometres. Because the sandstone is considerably softer than the Lewisian gneiss on which it sits, climbing the Hills is unique and dangerous. Aside from the loose rock are the unforgiving features such as deep ravines and steep ridges with no escape routes. The mountains are spaced well apart and very pretty to look at, as I pedal along Upper Loch Torridon watching another tourist boat bang up and down in the waves. Torridon Hotel offers luxury accommodations for rich hillwalkers. I pass it by and continue on to the unmanned campsite in Torridon that has the densest population of midges I have yet encountered. Getting the tent up is a challenge. Cooking dinner without getting the life blood sucked out of me is impossible. I opt for a cold dinner and crash.

Glen Torridon is the spectacular, and flat, route out of town. Lightly travelled, the route follows the River Torridon on one side and a series of “Hills” on the left. I stop at the first parking lot to find one of my bags was not closed properly (I wonder by whom?). I have spread a string of corn flakes down the road. I skipped breakfast to avoid the campground midges, and now eat the cornflake remains. Today’s marvel is sitting in a sunny parking lot eating commercial breakfast food while looking at a snowstorm on the top of Liathach (1,055m).

This is no small snowstorm, either. I watch for forty-five minutes as the snow continues to build, and build. Now I understand why walkers are warned to be prepared for winter conditions when they hike these hills. I would not want to be caught in that. I chalk this up to the continuing phenomenon I have seen where clouds, moist with warm sea air, bump into tall mountains and hills. The mist condenses into water and all kinds of marvellous things happen, like snowstorms, rain, waterfalls, and lochs on the top of mountains. I tear myself away and ride up to 111 metres, then coast downhill through trees, a bubbling burn, and arrive at Kinlochewe. I have had a lovely ride and the tea stop in Kinlochewe is grand. I deserve it. The next part of the day is not going to be so jolly.

I am diverting to Achnasheen. By so doing, I will be able to visit Kyle of Lochalsh by taking a train ride that terminates there. Achnasheen has a hotel and hostel, a train station, and a major road junction. That’s it. Sadly, to get to Achnasheen, I need to follow one of the major roads (A832) to Inverness. A cycle path heads out of Kinlochewe and ends abruptly, forcing me onto the main road which has no verge. A wire guardrail has been installed so that I can’t pull over. The first four kilometres are straight up. If it weren’t for the trucks, caravans, and rental cars speeding by, this might be a lovely route. Part way up a small 0.5m tarmacked edge gives the illusion, to automotive drivers, that cyclists have sufficient room. Thus, they neither slow nor move over. A viewing point on the left provides a safety oasis. I stop and look back over Loch Maree, one of the most beautiful views in Scotland. The clouds are getting darker, the wind continues to increase. It is also blowing right in my face. The next ten kilometres are going to be a real joy. This joy is foreshadowed by a speeding construction truck that swerves to avoid a car entering the viewing point. The truck bed misses my head by a hand’s breadth. I mean to give the driver the finger except I am ready to topple over. Survival wins out.

My enthusiasm for today’s venture is dampening, both figuratively and literally as the heavens open up. Nothing like rain on a major road to block out the visibility of a two watt rear bike light. I make it over the summit to find the wind blasting down Loch á Chroisg. This terrific headwind means the long coast downhill requires serious pedalling. I have to tell you, there is only one thing more demoralising than having to pedal mightily on a downhill section of road. That is, pedalling mightily on a downhill section of road in the pouring rain. Life sucks.

At the point of exhaustion, good things start to happen. First, and my personal favourite, a geologic anomaly. Monumental piles of gravel rocks across the Loch that look like a giant moraine, but not quite. I have no idea what this is. Speculating takes my mind off imminent physical collapse. Next comes a charming bridge over the river Abhainn Loch á Chroisg’s. Its pedestrian/cycleway is in the direction I want to go. Leaving the heavy traffic behind, a giant sigh of relief escapes when I go through the gate onto the bridge. Third, the bridge has information signs and tells me it was built in 1819 by Thomas Telford who, I am beginning to think, built most of the bridges, harbours, and public works in Scotland at the beginning of the 19th century. Except, of course, for lighthouses. Those all went to the Stevensons. Crossing the bridge, I come to Ledgowan Lodge, a private residence and a stone’s throw from Ledgowan Lodge Hotel (and hostel) where I am staying.

I ride up to the Hotel, walk in and think: they are going to throw me right out. It is a shooting hotel, when it is not luxurious accommodations for tourists. Stag heads are everywhere, as are glass cases of memorabilia, carved wood and wood panelling, and a front desk man who doesn’t bat an eye at bedraggled me dripping all over his tartan carpet. He gives me the warmest welcome I have had in weeks. Before I am taken to the hostel out back, he shows me the lounge, the bar, and tells me he hopes, when I have finished unpacking, I will join them and make use of the hotel’s facilities. I think he deserves a diplomacy award for describing my tossing dirty, greasy, sodden bike panniers into my room as “unpacking.” I don’t get this kind of welcome in places I do belong. I finish dripping all over the tartan carpet, then push my bike to the new lodging, and open the door to find a passable hostel that is 10% the cost of next door.

My top bunk is in a room with forty-fivish Bill. He and his mates are hiking and biking for the week. Bill is odd man out and doesn’t bat an eye at bunking with a strange woman. My first reaction is: “Hey, Bill. I am fucking exhausted and twenty years older than you. How about YOU move to the top bunk.” I muzzle myself and then, on reflection, marvel at the continuing goodwill of fellow outdoorspeople. Bill didn’t ask to bunk in with an old bat, and HE isn’t complaining. To celebrate this insight, I run over to the Hotel for a beer. Tomorrow will be a train ride, requiring no effort on my part. I celebrate that, too.





CHAPTER XVII. Wester Ross





Next morning I cycle to Achnasheen Station and prepare for a top train ride. On the way, an information sign explains that the piles of gravel rocks are the remains of an ice-dammed lake. It takes a while to get my head around this explanation because the huge gravel piles were at the bottom of the lake. They go by the name of Achnasheen Terraces, the aetiology of which has been debated for decades. I am trying to imagine that the water level was hundreds of metres higher here during the ice age. Other glacial and related landforms abound around this hamlet.

As I look at them, the train chuffs into the station and then just sits. This is a single rail track, and Achnasheen Station is a token stop. In the old days, the drivers of the two trains were required to physically pass a token. Whomever had the token had the right to be on the track. Woe be it to you if you crashed into another train and were tokenless. The system has been upgraded, a bit, but the driver still needs to get out and do something in that shed he goes to, and to which he does not go until the train coming from the opposite direction pulls up.

I find my seat nestled amidst a tour group. This group has come from Inverness, Highland tourist mecca, on a day trip with a guide. Their price is orders of magnitude more than what I have paid for my Senior Railcard ticket. However, this apparently entitles them to look down on scruffy me, which they do. We head towards Lochcarron alongside a major, albeit single track road, that is the major thoroughfare to Inverness. Watching out the window, I am glad that instead of following this road I decided to spend the night on the River Carron. This road would be plain unsafe. The landscape in Lochcarron looks different from the train than from the bike, so a revisit past Loch Carron is still interesting. We pass the request stop at Attadale Station where the train will stop for you if you wave it down, but continue on if you forget to get your head out of that book. The picturesque town of Plockton passes by. The train slows, goes through a series of very narrow rock cuts, and arrives at Kyle of Lochalsh.

Kyle of Lochalsh used to be a busy town when the Skye ferry left from its waterfront. The construction of the Skye Bridge has diminished the town, but I find it has treasures. One of them is not the main road to Skye that passes through the centre of town with a steady stream of heavy traffic. I head towards the now quiet water front. Looking over Kyle Akin, the narrow body of water between Kyle of Lochalsh and Skye, it is a treat seeing the back side of Sgùrr na Coinnich on whose slopes was Otter Haven at the Kyle of Rhea. Back on the main street there is a pharmacy selling books. I buy two. The Art Market is interesting, the marine stores more so. Best, though, is the Coop.

I have been days on end with only tiny shops. The Coop is big and full of gastronomic tourist indulgences. Thanking the tourist economy for the gourmet delectables, I snatch many off the shelf then head down the back stairs, ending at the Buth Bheag, a teeny tiny shop on the waterfront. The Buth Bheag sells terrific seafood sandwiches for a pittance. They have ice cream, too. I get both. Back to the train station and a rummage around before we board the train for the return trip to Inverness for most of these tourist day-trippers, the male contingent of which is all reading newspapers purchased in Kyle of Lochalsh. The spectacular scenery passes by, looking different on the return trip. I am seen as a local when I hop off at Achnasheen. Much to my delight, the Kyle Line is waiting for the token. It’s a restored steam train with first class dining, lots of charm, and full of people who have paid an exorbitant amount to travel the same route I just did on my Senior Railcard. Three more cheers for the tourist economy. I hop on my bike, hang bags of gourmet delights off the handlebars, and pedal slowly back for tea.

As I walk into the hostel, I see Bill. He is very hard to miss. He looks like he has been trampled by a herd of cattle. He has bruises on his face, cuts on his arms and legs, and is so stiff he walks like the Tin Man. Bill and the boys were on a fifteen kilometre off-road adventure where at Kilometre 13, Bill came off his bike. As in, “over the handlebars at speed” off. Not having any kind of communication gear with them, the group’s emergency response was: “Hey Bill, you look awful. Maybe you should go to the Emergency Room.” Bill and one of his more compassionate mates started the long road home where, another four kilometres down the road, Bill came off his bike again. This time a sideways “scrape off all your available leg skin” way.

I mutter sympathetic noises while my mind is thinking several inappropriate thoughts. A: Funny how karma put me into the top bunk because there was no way Bill would ever be able to get up there. B: If emergency services DOES have to come, it will be easier to haul him out of the bottom bunk. C: Is he going to moan pitifully all night? D: There but for the grace of God. I check my EPRB to make sure it is still working and, with a big dose of vicarious caution, go to bed. (Bill is a real trooper and does not moan, but he sure doesn’t get much sleep. Next morning, he doesn’t even get up. I am not sure he CAN get up.)

I am rewarded for not making fun (out loud) of the tourists on my Kyle of Lochalsh trip and for being (outwardly) sympathetic about Bill’s plight. The next day is sunny and the wind is at my back. I retrace my ride to Kinlochewe and beyond. I ride along Loch á Chroisg taking a last look at the Achnasheen Terraces and am treated to a golden eagle sitting on a post at the side of the road. It’s a very long, gradual ascent and with the wind assist and sun, pleasant. The descent is exciting because I can fly down the road without fear of being killed. It’s Sunday. Most things in this part of the world shut up shop on Sunday. Including traffic. This as opposed to the Hebrides, especially Lewis, where everything shuts up shop, everyone is supposed to spend the day in church, and it probably is a sin to even drive your car. This is a good long ride, today, but I am laden with wonderful groceries. I stop for a breather in Kinlochewe where not a blessed thing is open, then head off to Gairloch.

The ride along Loch Maree is meant to be one of the most beautiful in Scotland. It might be if you could see Loch Maree. Here there are trees, big trees including the vaunted Scots Pine. Some are centuries old. They totally block out the view. I stop at an interpretive centres and two car parks. One has signs about Slioch. At 981 metres and right across the lake, it is a spectacular sight. It, too, is of Torridonian sandstone. The sign tells me it used to be seven kilometres high before it eroded and the land rose. How do they know these things? It’s a good story, especially as I estimate how high in the sky seven kilometres might be. The Loch Maree picnic site further up promises a beach and spectacular view. It has both, as well as a plague of midges. Midges usually keep to themselves during the windy, sunlit day. Having them ruin lunch makes me cranky. I depart hastily, riding up a long hill. The road flattens out. It’s pretty with many lochs and burns connecting them. Moorland replaces trees. Not a car passes. The wind is down. The sun is out. Good karma all around.

The narrow, pot-holed road towards Gairloch is along a ravine with guard rails. Guard rails are great if you hit them with your car because, at bonnet height, they stop you. However, if you hit guard rails with a bike, the bike stays at the guardrail. You go ass over teakettle into the ravine. Thus, a measured descent is called for. This follows a large water pipe (that ends up at the omnipresent micro hydroelectric plant). Vegetation on both sides of the road breaks up the landscape from the never-ending rock and bog. Oops. Spoke too soon. Below the power plant the water pipe turns into the attractive River Kerry, rapidly flowing over small rocks and looking very fishable. Badachro Inn is accessed by taking a left turn-off over a bridge. I dodge a humongous caravan that thinks it is going to Badachro and promptly gets stuck on the bridge. If I pedal fast, I should make it to Gairloch before the caravan gets unstuck and heads my way. I do, on a surprising two lane road where I absolutely tear along and find myself in a booming metropolis.

If you ever visit Scotland, and I hope you do, you will come across the Visit Scotland website. The site does its mighty best to portray each and every tiny point of civilisation as a wonder. The Visit Scotland thesaurus for superlatives must run to volumes. After a while, the descriptions all look alike to me. You will see historic things. Seas things. Birds, mammals, and rock things. Wikipedia outdoes itself, too. It describes one of Gairloch’s many assets as having a Chinese takeaway. Thus, I am surprised when I get here.

This is an interesting little burg, starting with the Old Arms Inn where I settle down for tea and cake while sussing out the map. Across the street are a boat ramp and storage area for small sail craft, with someone coming in from a nice day on the water. Further along are a grocers, gallery, and souvenir shop. A large dock, nets, containers and building give away the commercial fishing that takes place on The Minch, the legendary body of water separating the Isles of Lewis and Harris from the mainland. Then I realise, this is not Gairloch. This is Charlestown, a southern suburb. Gairloch is one kilometre up the road. Excitement reigns. If Charlestown is this good, Gairloch must actually have stuff and lots of it.

At a rise in the road with a parking lot, complete with tour bus, I have my first view of Gairloch. It appears to go on forever. I pass a name brand petrol station with two pumps and an island. Next is the Gairloch Hotel which looks like a hotel, as opposed to a pub with pretensions. I ride on a road that surely floods in bad weather since the waterline is two metres to my left. Up ahead is a metropolis. New York City compared to what I am used to. First stop, the Gairloch and Loch Ewe Action Centre (GALE), also a Tourist Information Centre. It’s a new building with lots of “stuff:” information brochures, souvenirs, displays, places to sit, and very helpful people. Also, great views of northern Skye. Nirvana. Even though there is a McColl’s shop next to us, I am still not at the central business district which has a second shop. I pass Gairloch Heritage Museum on my way to the centrally located campground. Crocodile Creek Wilderness Store, with the long beach across the street, is buried in beach toys for sale. The beach is empty. Up the small rise and, voila, the main event. The main street is a series of stone shops, mostly white, selling all manner of things. Lastly, praise be the Lord, is Mountain Coffee Company with the elixir of life. Hillbillies, a bookstore, is conjoined. I am too overwhelmed with all this goodness to sample it tonight. I head up Minol Road to Gairloch Holiday Park, score a picnic table and walk to the hot shower, taking in the panoramic view of Gairloch Loch.

Why, why, why do people create coffee shops and then open them at 9am? Mountain Coffee Company’s Facebook page (and I HATE Facebook) says it is “always open.” A patent lie. So I have no idea when I am going to be able to satisfy my addiction. In the morning I shoot out of my sleeping bag and run down the hill, hoping for the first decent cup of coffee in a month. I discover: IT IS OPEN! THE COFFEE IS GOOD! At an outside table, I cradle my lovely cup of coffee in my hands, soak in the view and the warm sun. Wonder of wonders, it is a lovely day. Jittery with my first caffeine injection, I roam into Hillbillies. Why would you name a bookstore “Hillbillies?” It’s quite the independent bookstore. One of the best for the diversity and uniqueness of the offerings. A treasure that I purchase is, The Prisoner of St Kilda. Shamelessly I will let you read the blurb because it is what grabbed me, at the bookstore and beyond:

Married to a Scottish law lord, Lady Grange threatened to expose her husband’s secret connections to the Jacobites in an attempt to force him to leave his London mistress. But the stakes were higher than she could ever have imagined. Her husband’s powerful co-conspirators exacted a ruthless revenge. She was forcibly removed from her Edinburgh lodgings and carried off to the Western Isles, doomed to thirteen bitter years of captivity. Death was her only release.

Who kidnapped Lady Grange? How could this prominent member of Edinburgh society simply vanish? Why did no one try to find her?[6]

Have you ever heard of Lady Grange? Me, neither. It sounds like a good read, though, and since my plans are to go to St Kilda, why not? More on this later because the story is ten times better than the blurb, and true. Piled up with very interesting books, which will not fit on the bike, I have another cup of coffee, amble around the central business district, and then repair to my picnic bench home, read, and tidy up from long days of being on the road.

Today’s ride is short and only over to Poolewe where the Inverewe Garden calls. First stop, though, is the Gairloch Heritage Museum. The museum is a model of what local volunteerism can accomplish, as evidenced by its Queen’s Award for Voluntary Services, equivalent to an MBE for voluntary groups. With a decidedly local bent, the diversity and depth of the displays keep me for hours. Inside this small building are a series of home life exhibits including laundry, wool spinning, knitting and weaving. One exhibit is a Preacher’s Ark, a portable wood pulpit that was toted from place to place and set up at religious gatherings. It is accompanied by written narratives of residents who attended such, as in walking sixteen barefoot miles in a day to a field filled with hundreds of believers. The fervour of the events is also captured with preachers taking on rock star status. The obligatory rocks are here, too. In addition to the standard geological samples and Neolithic utensils is the Gairloch Pictish stone. Carved with a salmon and part of an eagle in approximately 500 – 700AD, it’s particularly important because Pictish remains are scarce. The Salmon figure has been adopted as the Museum’s logo and residents are rightly proud of it.

I am lured to other attractions such as Farquhar Macrae’s store re-creation with lots of 1940’s original stock, display boxes, and fittings. There are both farming and war exhibits, and a fun education exhibit that is more detailed than usual about what was happening in schools. One of my favourites, though, is the entire lighthouse Fresnel lens on display. The volunteers, who have been working continuously here for forty years, saw an opportunity when the Rudha Reidh lighthouse was automated, scooped the lens, and built a display room for it. Guess what family built the lighthouse? You are allowed to touch the lens and leave fingerprints, but are asked to keep your fingers out of the gears. I am assuming the mercury that floated most of these lenses has found its way to a hazardous waste site. Full of local knowledge, I depart and ride to Poolewe and Inverewe Gardens, which lives up to the hype. I sit in a quiet place in the Gardens, reading a book and let the rest of the warm day go by.

Today’s ride is a fair piece over hilly terrain. The first bit is on a road running high over Loch Ewe and the Isle of Ewe. The landscape is unassuming but pretty. I am surprised to find the Loch was a naval anchorage in WWII. Because this does not look like a military area, I am more surprised to find that, today, the Mellon Charles Royal Navy Depot and Pier services NATO nuclear-powered subs. It’s another one of those schizophrenic moments where the real pastoral scenery is distorted by the surreal knowledge that the jetty I see is designed for things that can destroy mankind. Off-put, I head to Laide with its lovely store and front bench in the sun. In a graveyard and next to a caravan park, I finally manage to find another chapel attributed to St Columba. It’s fairly nondescript but the view over Gruinard Bay is quite stunning. I head west on an elevated road that has spectacular views but some horrendous ups and downs. I pass a small cemetery with an interesting gate and decide to sit down, have lunch, and take in the view in the warmth generated by the solar heated gravestones. Down the road is Gruinard House, largish for this part of the world, well maintained, tidy, in the middle of nowhere and exactly what you would expect it to be…the house of a laird who was doing OK in a landscape devoid of anyone else. Guess where the crofters went? If you said “cleared,” you would be correct. In this case, though, it was probably a good thing.

Gruinard Island is across the water. In 1942 the Ministry of Defence was fascinated by anthrax. In its quest to find out what might happen, the Ministry decided to send scientists to Gruinard Island. Here they exploded six small bombs filled with anthrax and, presumably, ran like hell. A flock of sheep remained as tell-tales. The sheep died. Very quickly. The Ministry decided to seal off the island. Contamination signs warned off the curious for decades. In 1987 a second team of scientists arrived on Gruinard to decontaminate the island. This they did and pronounced it “safe.” I am suspicious about the last bit. Anthrax has very hardy spores, resistant to natural conditions. These spores are long-lived. Less scientific and more hysterical estimates give them 1,000 years.

The University of Michigan’s Medical School tells us that anthrax can reproduce and make baby anthrax in the soil, without a mammalian host. It can survive drought, cold, and other harsh conditions then germinate instantaneously when it finds a new animal or human to infect. In awe, scientists have found it a very hardy bacteria, dedicating one third of its genome to making little anthrax spores. One contemporary scientific article gives it a half-life of 100 years. Other current scientific articles speak to decontamination with one indicating a farm would be “difficult” to decontaminate. How about a 196ha island? I see sheep on Gruinard and watch for the sea eagles that fly around it. The island looks beautiful, untouched, and a perfect camp site. Too bad, because I am definitely not going there. Instead, I flee the breeze blowing towards me from Gruinard Island and hasten down Little Loch Broom to Camusnagaul for the night. (Say that one three times fast).

From Camusnagaul, Ullapool is the next destination. Ullapool is the centre of the universe in these parts. If I threw a rock to Ullapool from where I am, it would be an eight kilometre flight. Because of the terrain, my bike and I need to cover thirty kilometres up through a range of mountains and then down a main road. The main road connects Ullapool to Inverness. Any road leading to/from Inverness is a cycling nightmare. This assumes I survive the ride up the Dundonnel River with its many waterfalls. The first stretch of road is beautiful with An Teallach (1,062m) on my right and Little Loch Broom on my left. The road follows the Loch and only begins to rise when the trees begin. It’s a long slow grind, but very doable. The road is an unexpected two lanes, making it relatively safe. The river has many small waterfalls, rapids, and rills. The waterfalls are frequent but are not accompanied by parallel steep climbs. I exit the woods near Fain Bridge to open moors.

Further along, I see a panoramic view of spectacular mountains including Sgurr nan Clach Geala (1083m) with eight+ peaks topping 900 metres surrounding it. All of them are in dark, dark cloud. The wide, well graded road carries on for kilometres with moors on my left and right, magnificent mountains straight ahead. A slow descent begins, then a sharp left hand turn. The coasting continues down all the way to Braemore Junction. Only later do I learn that this is one of several “Destitution Roads” built during the Highland Potato Famine of 1846 - 1847 when crofters received an oatmeal ration in exchange for work. They did a very good job.

Braemore Junction is where I find Corrieshalloch Gorge. Braemore Junction is not a populated place. It is, literally, where the A832 (my road) joins the A835 (the Ullapool road to Inverness). As time passes, I have gotten more adept at anticipating what might be at certain locations. For example, a junction of two major roads usually holds a commercial enterprise. A major intersection next to a National Trust for Scotland National Nature Reserve indicates: commercial enterprise, souvenir shop, toilets, tea shop, and any manner of civilised things after a long ride.

Here, there is nothing. I mean, nothing. Not even toilets. And I have to go. I am so disheartened by this state of affairs that I run into the bushes and take a miss on the Gorge, in part because the last several hours of my life have involved looking at unbelievable beauty, unsullied by others. The Gorge parking lot is full of cars and tour buses. The entrance to the Gorge is jam-packed. People are yelling at each other. Dogs are barking. Something tells me things are figuratively going downhill from here. I see the Corrieshalloch Gorge from a distance and take a left to Ullapool.

This road was not made by the crofters. It sucks. It has no verge. It does have potholes. It is narrow. It is full of trucks, buses, and rental cars on their way to the Hebrides. I ride like a woman possessed along the River Broom which is probably lovely, except I am staring down at the road looking for potholes. I lust for a tearoom. There is none. The road starts a slight climb up. After a bit, I find a pulloff with no picnic table. I sit down on the guard rail to munch on a snack. With my nose in the trough, and totally focused on whatever treasure might be in my little food box, I am blown off the rail by a gigantic “BOOM” and whining scream. Snack box food everywhere. Above is a fighter jet so close to my head I can see the wheels and pilot. Seconds later, another one does the same 180 turn right over my head. Perhaps the Royal Air Force tactical maps say: “If you see a cyclist at this parking lot, do a low altitude U-turn right over their head and scare the shit out of them?” Am I now to add the chance of getting bombed to the chance of getting smooshed by a tour bus?

I keep focusing on the spectacular landscape off to the left and make it to my night’s lodging. They forgot to mention said lodging is at the top of a rise so steep I need to walk the bike and, at one point, take off the panniers to get there. My host tells me the stretch of Inverness Road I was on is called “Desolation Road.” On the one hand, I think he is confused with “Destitution Road.” On the other, I think he is dead right.

Ullapool is the gateway to the northern Hebrides. Since these are the most populated islands, the amount of commercial ferry traffic through Ullapool is amazing. Tesco trucks. Coop trucks. Construction trucks. I wonder how many of these, especially the food trucks, come home empty. The economics don’t appear to have dented the island-ward flow. Today is “See Ullapool Day” and much there is, although some of it is very touristy, especially on West Shore Road which fronts Loch Broom. I see my Airbnb host in a coastal rowboat with his mates enjoying a calm day. They row by an enormous sailboat that is visiting. As I admire the view, a RAF jet buzzes the town. Not flies by. Buzzes. If the jet is over 100 metres high I would be stunned. The noise is deafening. I ask a local what that is all about, in the lull before Number 2 jet does the same thing. The answer is, daily occurrence. What did poor Ullapool do to be a mythical target for training runs from the RAF base in Stornoway? Perplexed by why the locals tolerate it, I move on to sightseeing.

One street inland from the waterfront, things get more comfortable with a Post Office visit. Here we all have a laugh over my delight at picking up another food box (Christmas!) and then reshuffling things into the same box and sending it to the next major stop (Stornoway). Up the street is the Visit Scotland Ullapool Centre which is very helpful, including sharing that the Salt Restaurant in Achiltibuie is divine and the coffee next door is good. It is. The Ullapool Museum looks very interesting. I go in.

The Ullapool Museum was built to a design approved by Thomas Telford. It’s a charming building, “charming” being a word that regularly pops into mind for structures in which Telford had a hand. Much like the mission churches that were established in far flung parts of Scotland, these “Telford” churches were also created by an Act of Parliament and constructed in thirty-two locations throughout the Highlands. Only 30% survive, with the Ullapool one being the best example. Ullapool’s is large enough for 492 worshippers and has an upstairs gallery as well. All this space is jam packed with oddments, including volunteers engaged in genealogical research. One of them takes me upstairs where a video enlightens a small group of us. We are then free to wander. I wander back downstairs to some of the zillion folders which describe life in Ullapool, including the factory processing ships from the Eastern bloc that fished for mackerel and frequented Ullapool from the 1970’s to 1990’s. I discover that Ullapool was founded in 1788 by the British Fisheries Society and did not exist before that time. Thus, streets are laid out very tidily. I consider my £4 very well spent and head off to the Arch Inn for a beer. Then back up that horrendous hill, which is at least walkable with all the panniers off the bike, and to bed.

The ride back down the horrendous hill is necessarily a walk since there is no way my brakes or heart can contend with a twenty-six kilograms load and that precipitous drop. Must be fun in the winter. At the ferry things are also exciting. I don’t often get to load with tractor trailer trucks and a lot of them. We cyclists are herded to a safe spot because there isn’t much manoeuvring room for the trucks. The tourist car drivers are so focused on getting onto the ship that pedestrians and cycles are in peril. The crew point me to a side rail and rope where all is lashed down. A huge fish truck oozes fish goo next to me. I dance over the puddles and run upstairs to see if the CalMac menu still sports mac and cheese (it does) and the very culturally conflicted Vegetarian Haggis Nachos (still there). I head to the upper deck where the visibility is going to be the best, and the wind chill awesome. However as luck would have it, there is one seat right next to a smokestack that is cosy.

I sit in my eyrie for the whole trip because the view is tremendous, even forgoing mac and cheese. Not only is the ride out of Loch Broom to the Minch new and interesting. For me, there is the retrospective view of everywhere I have been. I see Gruinard Island and the mouth of Loch Ewe. In the background is An Teallach. Further down the coast are the Torridons looking reddish and majestic. I have come a long way. I feel really good about that and remember all the wonderful things I saw and did, especially the people I met along the way. I wonder how Stornoway will be. A place that shuts up shop for Sunday, and everyone goes to church, is going to be very interesting methinks.





CHAPTER XVIII. Lewis





Stornoway is architecturally eclectic. The ferry arrives and docks next to a cruise ship. I take in a scene that could be called tawdry, historical, disturbing, or many other adjectives of which charming is none of them. It does not take long, though, to find that the charm is in the residents of Stornoway. Lewisians are a hardy lot, living three hours by ferry from civilisation, which is Ullapool, which doesn’t really count. Stornoway is “commercial central” with multiple supermarkets, and big ones, ironmongers, construction, fuel depot, fishing, an airport, and an RAF Base.

The RAF Base is interesting because there is not much said about it in tourist information, on the Internet, or anywhere else. One gets the feeling they are trying to remain low key. I hate to tell them. Those fighter jets buzzing Ullapool and any number of places in the western Highlands give them away. A Search and Rescue (SAR) group also operates out of Stornoway, as does a Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) lifeboat.

The Search and Rescue group covers an enormous area. If you refer to a map of Scotland, the Stornoway SAR group covers from Shetland to Northern Ireland and all of Scotland. Of course, there are overlaps of groups for backup (such as, Shetland also has a SAR group) but, for each group, the crews need to be familiar with a lot of territory. Call-outs are marine and mountain rescue. Incidents frequently occur in horrendous conditions. Crews are forever plucking inexperienced climbers (read “tourists”) off Ben Nevis outside Inverness. What you probably didn’t know, and I certainly didn’t, is that the UK Search and Rescue Helicopter Service is no longer part of the UK’s Royal Air Force but was turfed out to a private company in 2013. Their web site tells us: “Bristow now operates from ten coastguard helicopter bases around the UK on behalf of Her Majesty’s Coastguard to respond to all SAR incidents for the whole of the UK.” The RAF Search and Rescue was officially disbanded on 18 February 2016 with Prince William, one of the last RAF SARS pilots, in attendance. The emergency calls come into the Coast Guard. They call out SARS, RNLI, or often both. The Stornoway SAR Group is hidden away over by the RAF air base and gets an emergency callout, on the average, every other day. The RNLI Severn Class lifeboat has a big range, too, and stays busy.

The further north I get, the stronger seems the affiliation of the local communities with these rescue services. Perhaps it is the increased involvement of loved ones and friends in fishing, a dangerous occupation on what can be tempestuous seas. Or that the employees and volunteers are friends and family. Whatever reason, everyone is glad they are here and truly grateful for their service. I am in awe of some of the rescues I have read about and more than a little relieved that if I need to activate my EPRB, I am not going to be alone for long.

I find the Heb Hostel which is not only a hostel but a home. Christine lives here with her partner Vojta, children Toby and Elsika, and father Tosh. I feel like I am meeting a host family. Tosh welcomes me enthusiastically with tea and starts right in with stories, the tour, and how things work. He is a frenetically busy person who never stops working. I have to laugh when, in a quiet moment, Tosh confides that he is getting older and sometimes he just gets tired. When that happens, he goes out to his peat plot and cuts peat.

Anyone who is anyone here has a peat plot. Peat provides heat and still is extensively used in the Hebrides. (By the way, the north of Lewis is essentially one gigantic peat bog so no shortage of peat). Your peat plot is a designated part of a peat bog where you cut YOUR peat. This involves first cutting away the top growth of sedge marsh, in itself back-breaking and laborious. You stack the sedge over there. You then slice into the peat and carve out rectangular slices using your peat iron. Because peat is saturated with water, these small slices are heavy. You toss each one over to another place. If you are fortunate enough to have a very valuable peat plot, with a very deep profile, you are tossing these sodden slabs head height onto the sedge.

If you decide you want to add to the challenge of the day when you have finished cutting a row, you can walk over to the peat blocks that you cut several days ago and start stacking them. These stacks are a traditional, useful size, the purpose of which is for the never-ending wind to blow through and dry out the peat. It takes knouse to build the stack and many of them are quite artistic. Or, you can toss the sedge from a finished section back into the bog to make room for the next successive cut. Or, you can go to one of your dry stacks, bag it, and lug it over to your car, usually a good long walk over bog. I am exhausted just thinking of what this all involves. Tosh is (supposedly) retired. This is how he takes a break.

Because Stornoway is the centre of the Hebridean universe, although the residents of every other Hebridean island would contest that, it is the place that has “stuff.” I even find a bike shop here, a good thing since my brakes need work. I discovered my brakes needed work a long, long time ago. I also discovered that there is no serious bike shop on the west coast north of Oban. The proprietor is a really helpful fellow and takes my bike in for a service, in spite of the backlog he already has. I am sent off for REAL COFFEE and a wander around the town. From a very nice café, I have a view of Lews Castle, which for mysterious reasons has lost its “i.”

The castle was built mid 1800’s by Sir James Matheson with his profits from the opium trade. He built the castle shortly before he purchased the whole island. In 1918, Lord Leverhulme acquired the estate. Lord Leverhulme is known generally as a successful industrialist and philanthropist. He is known specifically for soap. Lever and company fairly cornered the world market in soap and eventually went on to become Unilever in 1930, one of the world’s major multinational companies. In 1919, Lord Leverhulme added the estate of South Harris to his Hebridean holdings. He got involved in social and political engineering on Harris and Lewis to mixed effect. In 1923 Lord Leverhulme gave Lews Castle to the parish of Stornoway, dying two years later. What an economically challenged parish like Stornoway would do with a castle is a question worth asking. Tomorrow I shall go find out.

Or not. I ride up to Lews Castle where I am eagerly expecting to see the Lewis chessmen, or as many of the ninety-one as I can see. Discovered on the west coast of Lewis, they are the most important chess pieces in history. They are enchanting because of the carving intricacy and their humanity. My favourite is the Berserker Rook chewing on his shield. Lews Castle is meant to have four pieces. The entry is brand new and so is the lobby. It is dead quiet, though.

The castle/museum is closed for renovation. The docent tells me their chessmen are at the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh for safe keeping. Because they are closed, they don’t even have a gift shop. I have to make do with Ann Lanntair, Stornoway’s multi-cultural club and arts centre, right on the waterfront in a building architecturally designed to be at odds. It serves both a passable cup of coffee and has a gift shop. On display here are Lewis chessman key rings, Lewis chessmen bottle openers, Lewis chessmen individual pieces (all except the Berseker rook, my favourite and damn!), and three full Lewis chessmen sets of various sizes, the original replica size made out of plastic running to £1,000. I want it. Thank God it will not fit on the bike.

After drowning my “No Lewis Chessmen for You” sorrows in tea and cake, I decide to walk every street in downtown Stornoway, which really isn’t much of a feat. I like to read historic plaques and see several. At the Crown Inn on North Beach, I find this one.

It was in this pub where, in 1963 a 14 year old Prince Charles walked in and ordered a Cherry Brandy. That small, quick drink prompted worldwide headlines and a major police investigation into his under-aged drinking followed – as did the almost immediate suspension of his private detective.



The prince was a pupil at Gordonstoun School and was on the school training ship, the Pinta, when she sailed into town on June 17, 1963. Dinner at the Crown was arranged for them before a Jayne Mansfield movie at the Stornoway Playhouse.



Barmaid Christin Matheson had absolutely no idea who the prince was and, as is the custom, asked everyone what they would like to drink. The prince, who has since said he had tasted no alcohol except when the Queen had once given him a tot of cherry brandy before a hunt, decided to ask for just that.



It cost him two shillings and six pence (12.5p).



Chartered planes carrying reporters began to arrive the following morning. Crown licencee Alexander Macmillan, his brother and the barmaid were advised to go into hiding leaving his brother’s wife to serve the press and field their probing questions.



Her son Callum Ian Macmillan, a college lecturer, said: “My mum had never served a dram before. She didn’t know how. Who knows what size measure she gave them?”



At first Buckingham Palace furiously denied the cherry brandy incident had happened. However, after the prince’s detective Donald Green admitted he was not actually with him at that precise time, the palace was forced to retract the denial. Green was suspended and Charles was ordered back to Gordonstoun in disgrace to face the wrath of headmaster Robert Chew.



I remember the incident. I also remember stories of Charles loathing Gordonstoun, with its Spartan adventure living and cold showers. I figure he got his own back on that one. I also laugh every time I think of Callum Macmillan’s mother pouring water glasses full of whiskey for whomever sauntered in during the event.

As I arrive back at the Hostel, Christine is running out the door with Toby in hand. She says, “The Piping Band is playing today at 12. They usually play at 5 but a couple of the drummers couldn’t make it. If we hurry, we should be there on time.” I do a volte-face and run out the door after Christine and Toby. We make it to the centre of town which is chock-a-block full of, primarily, residents lining the intersection of Cromwell and Point Streets, the de facto downtown square. The energy is palpable with kids jumping up and down and adults chattering. The Lewis Pipe Band plays here every two weeks in the summer. Why is everyone so excited? Then we hear the sound of pipes and drums in the distance. The kids get even more wound up, running up and down the street. As everyone peers up Point Street, the band wheels around the corner and marches straight towards us, pipes blaring and drums banging. It is WILDLY exciting. The music is stirring and played with precision and enthusiasm. The appreciation of the local audience makes it a cultural reaffirmation. I feel jazzed up just being part of the crowd.

Aside from the men in kilts, the women drummers impress me with their sticks as they do all kinds of twirly things above and to the side while still managing the bang the drum on time. In amongst the band are kilted band offspring who are the next generation. The band marches up and down Point Street playing many rousing pieces. Then, a break. A solo piper steps out. He plays, and a contingent of women and girl dancers take to the street performing traditional dances. The amount of time they spend with their arms over their heads and on their toes is truly impressive. People walk by with collection buckets to which everyone generously donates. The buckets become so heavy that the younger girls can’t manage them anymore. The band cranks up again, heads down Point Street, turns right, and is gone.

Wow. That was so much fun. I take my time getting back to the hostel to find Toby, all four years old of him, now in a kilt with a drum around his neck banging away. It is hard to get annoyed with a kid who is so impassioned. Also, as Tosh flys by, it is clear that the nut hasn’t fallen far from the tree. Better Toby be banging on his drum than whatever else he would inevitably get up to since I doubt he ever sits still, either. Tosh runs around the hostel telling everyone “TOMORROW IS SUNDAY.” If you need anything, including food, get it now because you aren’t getting a blessed thing tomorrow with one exception. A rogue petrol station is open slightly north of town and evidently deals groceries. Do the Presbyterians tar and feather you if you go there? I have decided to head south on Sunday since the traffic will be non-existent. I don’t believe it is blasphemy to ride a bicycle on Sunday. Is it?

The road south is bleak. Lewis is pretty much a peat bog. A moorland. Treeless. Windswept. Unremarkable. Boring. You get the idea. As foretold, everything on the way out of Stornoway is closed. Everything. I pedal like hell just to get it over with. Finally in the distance the mountains of Harris heave into view. Hard to believe the two islands are connected. That is, there is nothing to separate them other than an imaginary line. Or, one is bleak and the other is beautiful.

I ride through Liubost (everything closed). At one point a turnoff has a lovely view over Loch Eireasort and the Harris mountains. A cairn here describes the escape of Bonnie Prince Charlie along this route. I am becoming more and more sceptical of the many places so attributed. The devotion to the Jacobite cause resounds with the telling of how even with an astronomical price on his head, the islanders kept Charles’ whereabouts a secret. That a cairn was constructed to tell the tale speaks volumes about the island’s allegiance, past and present.

The traffic is light, the exception being church goers headed towards the nearest place of worship. I coast down through Laxay then Balallan (nothing there to be closed) and take a left towards Kershader, my hostel for the night. This route follows the south shore of Loch Eireasort and, with its inlets, coves, and views to the north, very attractive. I pass the pub (closed), and arrive at Kershader (semi-closed). The hostel is open and soon a community person stops in to see if I am settled, offering to open up the community store if I need anything. I purchase fresh milk, always a treat, and settle in.

My enthusiasm for the ride has picked up with the exit scenery of Loch Eireasort and the looming Harris mountains. They get bigger and more scenic with every kilometre. Quite spectacular, but raising much concern as to where the road route through them is. I come up a hill and around a corner. Suddenly, there are trees. Nestled in amongst them are small lochs. Picture post cards views. I get through the trees to the other side and the landscape is no longer any of those Lewis things. It is beautiful. I come to a sign that says “Failte do dh’Eilean na Hearradh” with a subscript “Welcome to the Isle of Harris.” Crofts start to appear, as do sheep since there is something for them to eat. Endless beauty passes me by as does the Scaladale Centre.

The Centre is run by the Lewis and Harris Youth Clubs Association with the purpose of getting kids involved in outdoor activities, such as kayaking and rock climbing. It also sports a hostel which I am passing by because I am meant to be south of Tarbert provided I don’t collapse before then. So far the riding has been pleasant. However, as I sit eating my lunch in the parking lot of the Scaladale Centre, I see a road that goes steeply up ahead of me, 200 metres in a kilometre. No alternative route. This is going to be interesting.

At a glacial pace I grind away to the summit. Save for the descending coach bus which kindly makes sure I am OK in my lane, nothing much exciting happens other than it gets cold and windy. After summiting the route snakes along in between the mountains and skirts the entire base of An Cliseam (799m). With Loch Seaforth on my left and, further along, mountains on both sides with me in the valley, it is a very nice ride, ending with a screamer of a descent down into Ardhasaig and a store that sells ice cream. Here I stop for a bit, praying there is no more climbing today because I am pooped. It’s getting late, too. I zoom down the coast road, stop briefly at Tarbert, the ferry stop from Skye and a busy little burg I will pass by for now, and head on to Drinishader eight kilometres away. It is a really long eight kilometres. First is the ascent out of Tarbert. I know all you road bikers are laughing hysterically about a climb to 100 metres being an “ascent.” I challenge you to hang twenty-six kilograms of crap off your bike and see how you feel at the end of a long day. I am getting cranky. The scenery is not doing it for me anymore.

Meanwhile, the road to Drinishader is a side B road, one lane, and a good introduction into the geology of South Harris. It is rocky, up and down, with water kettle holes pockmarking the landscape. I finally arrive at a lovely hostel in Drinishader, have a cup of tea, and sit numbly in a big stuffed chair overlooking the Isle of Scalpay. At some point, I regain consciousness and toodle off to a nice hot shower and bed.





CHAPTER XIX. Harris





Time to embrace Harris. Harris is geologically spectacular, with the oldest rock on earth staring me right in the face. I was not quite expecting it to have that high school acne appearance. The depth of the topsoil here must be one centimetre because what is not water, is rock and a little grass here and there. For such nutritionally impoverished landscape, I ride through settlement after settlement, each only a couple of kilometres apart. Hmmmm. The clearing of South Harris was particularly brutal. The crofters lived primarily on the western side of the island, with pastures and reasonable soils for farming. At one point, many were given the choice to move to the east side of Harris and quickly learn to fish, or go elsewhere (Canada, Australia). Many did not want to go.

One story tells of a ship to Canada moored off the west coast of Harris, the crofters driven out of their homes, their homes/possessions burned, and then being given the choice of a free trip to Canada or starvation. All on the same day. Some chose to move to the east side of Harris and take up fishing, the reason so many small settlements are found here today. These settlements are picturesque. Their history is not. One practical relic from the time is an old road that goes cross island and was used to carry the dead from the east, where there is only rock, to the west with dirt where they were buried. It’s over ten kilometres with coffins often carried on foot.

I follow Golden Road along the coast, now with distant views of Skye. One story is that the name “Golden Road” comes from the exorbitant cost of building a road over such difficult terrain. I turn a corner and head up the road to a sign on the left that says BAYS Community Centre and CAFÉ. It’s not a café that is on any map I have. I turn into the parking lot and try the front door. Locked. Damn. I sulk at the picnic bench and chew on some dried fruit when, EUREKA, a car pulls up and two ladies hop out. They open up the door, walk in, and I scurry over and follow them in. I ask if there is truly tea. They give me a whole menu. While I am looking at the menu, I am also looking at all the cakes and decide, as a responsible athlete, to forego the salad sandwiches and have cake with cream. We get to chatting. I learn that this is a very active centre with the café being only one of its many activities. They are interested in my trip and point me further south along the coast road instead of back onto the main road where I was headed. As a totally appreciated gesture of goodwill, they also wrap up a free second slice of cake (made it yesterday, too old to sell today) before sending me on my way.

I am glad I took their advice. The riding is interesting, on a one lane road where I meet few cars and only the local community bus going like a bat out of hell. The Skoon Art Café is more art than café, and very interesting art. The proprietor then points me to a rock island along the way where the seals hang out. There are several of them within sight of the road. Further along is a salmon farm hatchery with tanks for small fry covered by netting to keep the birds out. While there is the occasional derelict croft, the area generally looks well kept, even prosperous in places. Probably self-catering cottages since I can’t see much to support the economy here. The housing thins out. Things are starting to get remote. Kilometres later I pass through Fleodabhagh, subscript Flodbay, home of one of the erstwhile café ladies. The signs remind me that Gaelic has a strong cultural presence here although, quite honestly, I haven’t heard anyone chattering away in it since I’ve been here. At this point the road is little more than a track with asphalt on it. Sort of a glorified cycleway that allows cars.

The topography has levelled out a bit. In the distance is Roineabhal, at 460 metres not particularly high. However, it sticks right out of the low lying moor and gives an imposing appearance. It also signals I am getting close to the south end of Harris and approaching Leverburgh. I pass several art galleries, out here in the middle of nowhere, but don’t stop. At Ardvey I almost miss the turn-off since it looks like an ill-kept driveway to someone’s house. It does, indeed, go up to someone’s house, then narrows and continues, potholed and grassy, to a cattle grid, gravel pit and small stockyard. At first it appears to dead end but, instead, winds left and gets rattier and narrower. I am not going to be well pleased if I end up at a dead end because it would mean going all the way back to Ardvey and trying to find the correct road.

Soldiering on, a large loch appears on the right. If it’s Loch Langabhat it means I am on the correct ratty, narrow, grassy road. I am now seriously thinking about doing an EPRB test because there is not a building within kilometres of where I am. With the exception of feeling misplaced, circumnavigating Roineabhal on a flat road is quite fun, especially since the mountain is blocking out the wind. Peat plots begin to appear, most not currently being worked. Then, lo, a salmon farm on the right and a wicked left turn into desolation.

The left turn puts me on a trajectory that is into the prevailing south-westerly wind. I start to climb the rise ahead of me. Peat plots on the right are definitely being worked, some with very artistic peat mounds. Many places use wooden pallets as part of their peat harvesting operation, to keep the peat off the sodden bog when it is drying. I get close to the top of the rise, with energy fading. To the left is a gravel pit, waist high. I climb into it and sit down. No wind. Lots of sun. Really, really nice. I pull out my thermos, make tea, and chow down on the Bay Café cake, giving me enough sugar and enthusiasm to ride into Leverburgh without stopping.

Guess who Leverburgh is named after? The way into town produces all the signs of civilisation that make a long ride end in jubilation. Coop market. A hostel that, while the owner insists on keeping all the windows open and freezing us, is clean and funky. Leverburgh, as with most remote Highland population centres and I say that loosely, has a school, medical centre, post office, and an aged care home. The population of the whole Isle of Harris is roughly 2,000. The population in Leverburgh is…not much. As one local muses, the island economy is totally unsustainable without tourism and government subsidisation of the lifeline services. I’ll enjoy it while it’s here. In truth I am here for only one reason - St Kilda.

St Kilda lies seventy-five kilometres west of Leverburgh. The logistics of getting to it are daunting. First, one has to get to Leverburgh (done). Next, one has to get a seat on one of the two tour providers that go from Leverburgh. The tickets for the day trip run from £140 to £190. Big bucks. I book a seat on the cheaper of the two for a day certain. However, because St Kilda is the last outpost of the UK and in the Atlantic, the seas and weather are legendary for being unaccommodating. If you get a seat, your boat may not go that day. You then need to determine whether there are any free seats on the next day, and the next day, and so on. Until you go. Or you don’t. A lot of people travel all the way to Leverburgh, spend days waiting for the weather/seas to improve, and go home empty handed or empty “adventure of a lifetime.” By now you are starting to wonder if the seas are that bad, doesn’t everyone get seasick? Good thinking. More on that later.

The day certain for which I have a seat is two days out because we already know nobody is going to sea in the current horrendous winds. Day three comes and goes. Leverburgh is ceasing to charm, even with the Butty Bus, a converted bus that contains seats, tables, and a diner-ish menu. Day four, I show up at the pier at the appointed time because the tour boat owner has not called me either way (go/no go). I find out later on the local tom-tom network that he had a pre-booked tour and took them, leaving me stranded. As I start to walk back to the hostel I see the sign of the OTHER tour boat operator on a building wall and decide to call them. This is done standing in the middle of the street since mobile service at the hostel is non-existent, as is Wi-Fi, making these reservation arrangements technologically challenged. As luck would have it, one seat left for tomorrow…if we go. I book it, grab a bacon roll at the Butty Bus, and then go back to the freezing hostel.

As the weather deteriorates, I fill in more days with side adventures. One is to Rodel, down the road, where I continue my circumnavigation of Roineabhal, coming to an abbreviated end at St Clement’s Church. St Clement’s is a medieval church, built sometime in the 15th or 16th century. It is quite unexpected, here on the promontory overlooking Skye. One description of it is as an “ecclesiastical jewel.” This it is. Three medieval carvings have been used in the 1784 reconstruction of the church, one with a human face looking down on me as I walk around the cemetery finding tombs of various Macleods. It is the Macleods of Dunvegan who built the original church and Captain Alexander Macleod of Harris who had it rebuilt. The interior is intimate with carvings, remains of a medieval cross, and a tomb. Since many of the Macleod clan chiefs were buried on Iona, speculation is that the church had an Ionian connection as well with some taking it further and alleging an original church with connections to St Columba. Having been to Iona, I think this is not a stretch. The church has that kind of feel. But all is guesswork because of fires, rebuilding, decay, rebuilding, and the final result which is, I think, glorious. The stairway to the top of the church tower is so narrow, dark, and claustrophobic that I do not take the first step. Outside, I do climb up to the highest point there, look over the waves to the west and see…St Kilda. My first glimpse. It looks remote, wild, and far away. I am mightily excited.

The next day I am in despair because the trip to St Kilda has been declared a “no go” yet again. I decide to take the ferry to Bernaray. Throughout my adventures on Lewis and Harris, tourist information has promised white tailed eagles. For my part, every bird I have seen looks like a white tailed eagle. The twitchers all laugh at me. One tells me, definitively, that I will know it is an eagle if it is being chased by other birds. What? I thought the mighty eagles would EAT the other birds. I am not buying it. The Sound of Harris separating Leverburgh and Berneray is meant to be a good site for eagle watching.

In the short term, I am distracted from watching eagles as the ferry plies its sinuous route. The bay between the two islands is shallow and very sandy. Navigational poles and markers have been placed so that the ferry does not ground itself. It is the path of a drunken sailor. At one point we do a 180 degree turn to stay in the channel. I see my demise and rivet my gaze on the potential maritime disaster, eagle watching be damned.

At the ferry terminus, I see none of the 138 people who live on Berneray and go for a hike to get a feel for the island. Still no people. I head back to the Lobster Pot Tearoom, which also houses the community store, and two people. This is depressing. No St Kilda trip today. Nothing much on Berneray, except tourists four of whom are sitting at the table across from me. Then one of the tourists screams, “Look at the Eagle!” Sure enough, I pick up my head, look out the window, and a B52 bird flies by being chased by three tiny birds. We stampede outside and watch as, with huge strong beats of its wings, the eagle and its entourage head south towards North Uist. My day is made.

Why does anyone want to go to St Kilda? Another good question you ask. Many people do, lured by some strong visceral attraction that is so very hard to explain. I want to go because St Kilda captivates me. Ever since I read about it in a National Geographic article decades ago, I have wanted to make the pilgrimage. It captivates me enough that the only reason I came to the Hebrides this trip is to go to St Kilda. This is the last time in my life I expect to be close enough to make the journey possible. Thus, with the on again/off again boat reservations, I vacillate between euphoria and despair.

Let me try to articulate the attraction. First is St Kilda’s remoteness. It is the last point of land between the UK and America. You have to get there by boat. Pictures I have seen show St Kilda’s four islands (Boreray, Soay, Hirta, and Dun) and surrounding sea stacks jutting magnificently out of the Atlantic, with heaving seas and birds all around. The visual imagery in photos and film is awesome. I think that seeing it all firsthand will be absolutely mind blowing. Second, are the birds. With the highest sea cliffs in Britain, St Kilda is home to an enormous population of seabirds. The National Trust for Scotland, the island’s present owners, estimate 1,000,000. This includes huge rookeries of gannets, puffin, and fulmars. While I am clueless as to the difference amongst them, the idea of seeing 1,000,000 all at once sounds like a life event to me.

I find the fulmars, in particular, fascinating. As a defence, fulmar chicks will projectile vomit orange goo at you, so you are covered in rotten fish smell glue that will not come off in a shower. The adult birds have so much oil in their bodies that they were sometimes dried and, with a wick, used as lamps. Guillemot eggs were on the St Kildan shopping list as were the birds, with estimates on the order of 10,000 – 20,000 taken each year. A special delicacy on St Kilda, and even today in the Hebrides and Shetlands, is dried young gannet, known as “guga.” It has a “pungent” taste that makes many people want to throw up. Puffins also made a yummy treat. The skies of St Kilda are alive with gannet, guillemot, petrel, manx shearwater and puffin. Large groups of birds, such as puffins, float and fish on the water beneath their cliff nests. A veritable supermarket. Puffin soufflé, anyone?

Third, is the story of the St Kildan people. St Kildans and their culture are rich and evocative. St Kilda was populated for centuries and potentially for two millennia. A mystique about how it was ever settled is part of the attraction. Another mystery is the name, since all you good religious people know, there is no St Kilda. Theories include: the shape of the islands on the surface of the water looks like a conical-bossed shield (Skildar being the Old Icelandic for shield); a 1592 book of charts identified the island as “S. Kildar;” the islands being named after a well (Tobar Childa) near the old village on Hirta; and the way Hirta (the main inhabited island) was pronounced by the St Kildans in their native Gaelic. Johnson and Boswell, in 1773, recount a doctor trying to make his way to the island because he had been summoned and in two weeks of rough seas was never able to make the open boat crossing from Skye. Another nugget is Johnson’s disputation of “the people of St Kilda catching cold whenever strangers come.” Well, Samuel Johnson is more wrong than right on this one, leading us to a story that makes the point.

In the early 1700’s a group of four men were rowed to Stac Biorach which now has the largest colony of guillemots in the archipelago and was prime birding territory for St Kildans. The four were deposited onto the stack, a seventy-three metres high, narrow piece of rock. The open boat that delivered them returned to the village on Hirta. Soon thereafter, everyone on Hirta fell seriously ill. A “contagious distemper,” likely smallpox, swept away the greater part of the inhabitants of St Kilda. The pestilence was brought by a visitor. Only four adults survived out of twenty-four families, leaving twenty-six orphans. The men on Stac Biorach remained there from the middle of August to the following Whitsunday (May/June) because there was no one to fetch them back.

Take a minute. That would be 9 - 10 months they spent on Stac Biorach, a place with no water source, no grass, no heat source, but lots of birds and rock. These people were tough.

They were also welcoming and generous. Those wrecked and rescued were well treated, often for very long times since no regular communication existed as John Sands, a journalist, discovered when stranded on Hirta in 1876. Vessels generally did not call at the islands in winter. Sands noticed that canes were washing ashore, deduced an ocean current, and began experimenting with throwing messages into the ocean. When nine Austrians were shipwrecked, the experiments moved from “entertainment” to “survival” since the resources of the islanders were severely constrained. Sands felt starvation was not far away. He and the Austrians constructed a canoe from a log, tied on a pickle bottle with a letter asking the Austrian Consul for help, and tossed it in the sea. A second message was attached to a buoy. The buoy arrived in Birsay, Orkney in nine days. The canoe, in Poolewe in twenty-two days. Help came and the “mail boat” system was born. An average of four of six mail boats launched from St Kilda reached a destination, including the final mail boat sent before the islanders left for good. It landed three months later in Norway.

Another “guest” whom they took on was Lady Grange. In the interludes between trying to get a boat seat, I have spent many hours researching St Kilda as well as reading that book about Lady Grange. Lady Grange was by all accounts a monumental shrew. Of course, all those accounts are written by 18th century men who expected their dalliances to be tolerated. Lady Grange did not tolerate. She was relentlessly vocal about her views. The story is fantastic, even more so because it is true.

Lord Grange was politically active, in the high stakes world of Jacobitism. Loose lips did not sink ships. They got you hanged. Lady Grange complained about everything, including his infidelity, his friends, the way he treated her, and told or wrote to whomever would listen, so much so that consideration was given to having her declared mad. Lord Grange seemed to think that his blabbermouth wife was one step away from outing him as a Jacobite and, evidently using the “Will no one rid me of this meddlesome priest” approach, looked the other way when his friends decided to help. Macdonald of Morar, MacLeod of Berneray, and their servants, came to take her away. To their dismay, she did not go peacefully with the scene described as bloody and brutal. But away she went. (That Edinburgh society, including her nine children, either noticed or felt compelled to mention Lady Grange’s disappearance gives some credence to the borderline mad shrew characterisation.)

They took her to Skye. Then, on to the Monarch Islands owned by Macdonald of Sleat where she remained as his guest for a year. She also went there kicking and screaming. She aimed her shrewishness at him and quickly wore out her welcome. Macdonald began to have second thoughts about incarcerating her and says so. With the fabric of the brotherhood starting to fray, the MacLeods, who were managing the stewardship of St Kilda for the clan chief, were consulted. Some bright light thought St Kilda would be a great place to unload her. There she went.

Imagine you’re a subsistence crofter on a remote island. An open boat pulls up. A woman in fancy clothes is unloaded. The open boat pulls away. You watch as the resident minister takes her to a small hovel. Then you puzzle over what on earth is going on. From various stories, the St Kildans were kind to Lady Grange. This kindness was not always returned. It’s not hard to understand that she might have been out of sorts when presented with a treat of guga. There was nowhere to shop. She wasn’t left with much money anyway. For the next seven years she remained on St Kilda.

With trade, doctors, churchmen, and other travellers stopping at the island, you might ask why she was not rescued. This, for me, is the interesting part of the story. The answer is: the Church of Scotland. The misogyny of this story, and Lord Grange never mentioning her by name again but referring to her as “that creature,” is easier for me to understand than the duplicity of the church. Because, the Church of Scotland knew she was there and did nothing about it. In fact, it made sure she stayed right there.

On St Kilda the Church of Scotland distinguished itself as being a killjoy. It did this in other places and at other times, too. Let’s stick with St Kilda. Because no minister wanted to go there, the Church would send ministers who were poorly qualified or not qualified at all. Because no minister’s wife in her right mind would want to go there, the minister was often single or sent without. That is not to say a few good ministers didn’t surface. But by and large the ministry was uneven. Many of the ministers were, for all intents and purposes, abandoned along with Lady Grange. This did not dampen their fervour.

Let’s look at their potential flock. St Kildans were a simple folk. I do not mean that pejoratively. They had a reputation for being kind, generous, shy, and guileless. They worked together collaboratively, the men holding a meeting each day on the main street to decide what work would be done and who would do it. They trusted each other, sharing equally the birds, eggs, fish, and meat that they harvested. Their spiritual lives involved paganism and faeries. They had a rich heritage of poetry, stories, songs, and dance.

The mission of the minister was to stop all that. No singing. No dancing. No faeries. Just fire and brimstone. Gentle as they were, the St Kildans relented in public. Private is another story. But the singing and dancing were definitely dampened. One resident spoke about how sad life became when the minister took away all the fun. So, instead of raising holy hell about a woman being held captive against her will, the ministry, in between being the song and dance police, helped her out as best they could with the islanders (she did not speak Gaelic). However, they made sure she remained incommunicado.

Finally, Lady Grange managed to get two letters off the island. When it was discovered that the letters had made it to Edinburgh, she was removed from St Kilda and hidden in several locations. A rescue ship came to St Kilda for her. It did not find her there. Her captors deposited her with crofter Rory MacNeill and his family in Waternish on Skye. There she died in 1745 at sixty-six. Lord Grange immediately married his London mistress.[7]

Over the next decades, life on St Kilda was much the same. Disease continued to be a problem with infantile lockjaw causing an 80% infant mortality rate in the mid-1800’s. The population declined further with the call of the mainland and WWI impact of men going off to fight. In 1930 the thirty-seven remaining residents asked to be evacuated to the mainland. You’d think they would have had enough of a life that involved subsistence living. The films I saw in Arisaig Land Sea & Island Centre tell a different story. They show people working collaboratively. They show a simple way of life, and people quietly, humbly and proudly talking about their community and how they lived. One film documented the angst of the evacuation decision, decided collaboratively by the community. Older residents, truly torn about staying or evacuating so that the young people could have a better life. Younger residents mostly eager, but torn by the sadness that life would change, for them and for the older people about whom they cared deeply. I left that video very sad because it showed such a love of the island and way of life, that all knew would be gone forever.

The houses were left unlocked with a Bible in each one. "I was only five, but I remember running around [the boat] with the other children," says Norman John. "My saddest recollection is seeing half a dozen of the women standing at the rear of the boat, their shawls round their heads like my mother, waving goodbye to the island until it was out of sight."





CHAPTER XX. St Kilda





The sun is up. The wind is less. We are going. I board the Orca III, a catamaran with huge engines leaving from Leverburgh to St Kilda. The cabin very comfortably seats twelve. Angus is Captain and Archie, his ten year old son, is with us. I am already thinking, “This kid is not going to be fazed one bit by the two metre swells.” He isn’t. Everyone else falls into one of two categories: prepared or not prepared. I do not take my seasickness tablets because they make me drowsy, but I have them in my front jacket pocket. The minute we leave Leverburgh I bundle up and find a spot behind the cabin where the wind is blowing in my face, and I can see the horizon.

Across the deck from me are two fellows who are dressed in matching outfits. These matching outfits are expensive, brand new, and include: hiking boots, hiking pants, braces, shirts, and down jackets. It’s the down jackets that give them away. Nobody who knows anything about outdoor gear is going to wear down anything on a wet boat. They are going to prove to be my entertainment, one in particular. He makes it fifteen minutes into the trip before turning green. Green he stays for the next three hours. The other fellow vacillates between being caring and supportive to running as far away from the smelly mess his friend has become.

The sun being out is amazing because, in the distance, we can see St Kilda as it ever slowly gets closer. Meanwhile, I check my nausea levels and as long as I keep my head into the wind, all is good. I also fixate on the back of the head of one of the crew who has a one quarter inch dent in the back of his head from which radiates a thick 14cm scar. It is the kind of scull damage that should render someone incapable. On the contrary, he is a lovely man, full of stories and information about our trip. So much so that I am too embarrassed to ask how he got that huge dent in his head. Meanwhile, other people are trying to push me off my protected perch with no luck. Birds fly by alongside going our way and faster than the boat. Little birds. How can this be?

After marvelling at the military telecommunications equipment at its peak, we round the corner into Loch Hiort, St Kilda’s not very protected harbour, and come face to face with a military base. All those pictures of St Kilda are historical. What we have today is barracks, kitchen, gym, basketball court, and a giant fuel facility on the beach that is being renovated. Four huge oil tanks are replacing four old oil tanks. Thankfully, they are long and narrow, as opposed to the giant cylindrical ones. Nonetheless, they are a blight. Period. The National Trust rents the island to the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for a small fee. The reality is, though, that the Trust would have difficulty managing the site were it not for the MoD. They call this a partnership. I still call it a blight.

Behind the military infrastructure are the cottages and main street of St Kilda. At the end of the pier are the visitor centre and school. We are deposited on the pier and given an introduction by the National Trust (NT) Ranger. We are then on our own. I sit down in the sun for a bit just to make sure I have recovered from the trip across. Green Boy is not looking much better. Up come the Soay sheep. When St Kildans left, they left their brown/white/black sheep. In their feral state, they have grown smaller and biologically interesting because they exhibit “overcompensatory density dependence.” Their population increases to unsustainable levels and then crashes. Then the cycle repeats. In 1989, the population fell by 66% in twelve weeks. Since there are a lot of sheep, the landscape littered with sheep carcasses must have been a shock to wake up to. Today’s little live lambs are very cute. Another boat of tourists comes. I hasten to the main street.

It is possible to block out the military infrastructure and get pulled back into time on the main street. It is everything I ever saw and read about. Imagining people living here takes not one wit of energy. I can see some of the historical photos in my head and know I am standing right where the St Kildans were when that photo was taken. The houses are being reroofed by the NT volunteer work parties. The village looks in good shape. Rock cleits, little stone storage huts, dot the landscape in random fashion. One cottage has information on cards. I take a handful of them and go outside in the sun to read, sitting on a bench like a St Kildan would. Even the oil tank construction can’t dampen my sense of place. I wander down to the site of Lady Grange’s hovel, which has also been described as a large cleit. It is no longer there, but even life in a cottage would have been a challenge. If she were truly in a smaller cleit, or bothy, it would have been damp, dark, and depressing.

I stroll around and then head to the House of the Fairies which is a prehistoric souterrain once containing a Viking spearhead. The cemetery is nearby, too. I enter to find the biggest stone was placed by a minister for his sister who did not even live on the island. Further in the back corner, though, is a newer stone. It is to a Macdonald who was evacuated in 1930 but who asked that his body be returned to the island he loved. His wife later joined him. That stone confirmed for me so many things.

I go back and visit the school and visitor centre before sitting down, overlooking Loch Hiort and Dun while waiting for the tender to take me back. I watch as a small boat pulls lobster pots, then head down to the pier. On board, we have a cup of tea and some cake before heading out. I am assuming we will zoom right back to Leverburgh. But no! Off we go on a tour around Hirta, the sea stacks, and circumnavigating Soay. It is a magical trip. The cliffs on Hirta are huge and full of nesting birds. The noise and smell are overpowering. The sky is filled as far as I can see with sea birds. The sea stacks jut right out of the sea. We travel very close to a number of them, including Stac Biorach where Angus stops the boat and points out, straight up and halfway up the stack, a tiny bothy where the four men lived out those 9 - 10 months. We follow the coast of Soay and see more sheep as well as a huge colony of puffins. Puffins are in the water and on the cliffs. They are small, colourful, and enchanting. The stacks and Soay are incomparably beautiful. At one point we are looking down to St Kilda through a number of sea stacks, a picture I saw in National Geographic, and a view I had longed for most of my adult life. I snap a photo, sunlit birds flying everywhere.

Angus turns and heads back to Leverburgh. Everyone who didn’t clue into the seasick medicine on the way out to St Kilda has figured out to take it now. Except Green Boy who says he doesn’t need it. Fifteen minutes later, Green Boy is not only green but running back and forth to the head. He smells to high heaven, which is disconcerting because he is running by me at my windblown perch. His best mate/partner has given up. I would have a hard time, too, being sympathetic with someone who after getting monumentally seasick on the outbound trip is too stupid not to take the many, many offers of tabs on the return home. Green Boy finally slumps down with his head cradled on his friend’s shoulder – on the other side of the boat.

I stay upwind. It’s hard to feel unsettled on such a glorious day. We see all kinds of birds, most of them flying by the boat at speed. Some of them are flying low and getting lifts off the waves. Others just motor on by, in a headwind. I marvel at nature. I also discover that Archie, the ten year old, has opened a lobster concession. I wangle one from him to have for dinner when we get back. We have spent so much time out at St Kilda that we need to take another tour over to Berneray to drop off two passengers who would not make the last ferry from Leverburgh. This is especially exciting because we go a slightly different way with the same sense of danger through narrow channel, shallow and sandy. I am grateful Angus is so capable because getting stuck out here would not be much fun. We roar into Leverburgh. I grab my lobster and head off to dinner with memories I will never forget.

The next day I ride to Tarbert along the west side of Harris. It is a quiet Sunday morning with…nothing open. Cars with people heading churchward pass occasionally as I travel along the stunning west coast of Harris. Harris has some of the most beautiful beaches in Scotland. If it were not for the water being too cold to swim in, they could be described as Carribbeanesque. The boat to St Kilda for the day has been cancelled because of the howling wind. As luck would have it, the day I went was the first and last day for another week. I am so grateful. I am not grateful to be blown off my bike, which is what is happening on a regular basis on this ride north. It’s hard to pay attention to the landscape. When I do, it is lovely farmland with fields, fences, and some cropping. This would be the farmland the crofters were kicked off and sent over to the rocky east side to become fishermen.

I slowly make my way past new construction of subsidised housing overlooking the Sound of Taransay and Taransay Islands. Truly spectacular views. Around the corner is Tràigh Losgaintir with its huge expanse of sand. High on the hill overlooking it, I see two people and a dog. Do they have enough sense to not get trapped by the rising tide? Do they know that these beaches have quicksand? I look again. It’s Green Boy, his friend, and now a dog. So the answer is, no. I don’t care. I just want to get to Tarbert. I pass the funeral road that went past the Bays Community Centre. I find a mound of rock that serves as a windbreak, huddle down, and have some tea and a snack. Finally, I coast down into Tarbert, buffeted all the way. I find the hostel and decide that is enough of that. Don’t they have a bus?

Next morning bright and early I ride over to the bus and look woefully at the Stornoway bus driver. Do you take bikes? Of course. You have to pay full fare for your bike. Full fare is £8. My alternative is to ride north over that horrendous hill, in the wind, and then many, many kilometres along the bleak, bleak road to Stornoway. I kiss the driver, shower him with money, put the bike in the hold, climb into a comfy seat, and take in the scenery that looks ever so much more appealing when I can see it from the lap of luxury.

It takes no time whatsoever to get back to Stornoway even though we make a number of stops. I run to the Heb Hostel where I am greeted as if I were a long lost family member. Then I sit down and plot tomorrow, the ride to the Callanish Stones. Except, I have now embraced the wisdom of bus travel. The Callanish Stones are a fair way away and if I cycled, I would be retracing my route. The road will also be weekday busy. I come up with fifty more excuses to facilitate my deliberation. I decide, conclusively, to take the bus tomorrow, and to the sound of a small drum banging in the distance, crawl into bed.

The bus system on Lewis covers a lot of territory and not with a high degree of frequency. Thus, it’s not all that easy to get to more than one tourist site on a day. Many very interesting sites are on the west side of Lewis, the Callanish Stone Circles being the most well-known. Sadly, the bus schedule will not let me go to these other sites. I take the first bus out of town and get dropped off near the entrance to the Stones. It is overrun with tourists and coach buses. The Visitor Centre is jam packed. I flee out the back door and clamber up towards the site. I hear a dog that barks, and barks, and barks. As I get closer to the top I see the unleashed dog running around the site, as are so many people that I can hardly see the stones. The brochure says that the stones are sinking and out of line because of the heavy tourist traffic. It says, in the same breath, that aren’t we lucky that Historic Scotland has kept the site open (not like other sites they smugly say) for people to wander around.

What is Historic Scotland thinking? The site is being trashed, and I am meant to be grateful that I am being allowed to trash it? The idea is that I can commune with the mysticism of the site. Hard to do with 200 people wandering around and a barking dog. This is all very disappointing so I start to head back down the hill only to meet Green Boy and his friend. At the same time, the barking dog runs up to us and starts licking my leg. I shout “No, No, Bad Dog.” The dog keeps licking. Green Boy and his friend keep talking. I yell “No, No Bad Dog” again. Green Boy and his friend keep talking at me. I break off the conversation, because I am so annoyed, and say, “I wonder who the fuck owns this fucking annoying dog?” Guess what Green Boy says?

I flee what is one of the worst historic sites I have ever been to, but not before buying a t-shirt. At least on the shirt, the site is unpopulated and looks mystical. I can dream. Pissed off about the experience and this being my one site for the day, I walk towards the bus stop. A woman approaches me and asks, “Are you Inga?” Well, no I am not. But this woman has a minivan and seems semi-commercial. I ask her, “If I were Inga, what would that mean?” She informs me that for £35, she would drive me from site to site all the way up the western side of Lewis, waiting while I inspected each site, and finally drop me off at the public bus stop in time for a ride back to Stornoway later in the afternoon. I tell her, “I changed my mind. I AM Inga.” I give her £35, hop in the van, and we head a short distance back to where there is another stone circle called Callanish 3. Slightly smaller stones. No people. Not a one. I can see the crowd at the Callanish Stones (Callanish 1) from where I stand. There is also Callanish 2, no people. Very magical. I am no longer pissed off.

But Inga is. It turns out, there really is an Inga. She is eight-eight years old and shuffles with a cane. I am now worried as to how the driver could possibly have mistaken me for her, but we won’t go there. The driver has gotten a call to retrieve Inga. We roar back to the Callanish Stone Visitor Centre and together get Inga into the mini bus. Then off we go. We see Carloway Broch, the remains of an Iron Age broch that is likewise being trampled by busloads of tourists. At the start of the path to the Broch is a shop that sells incongruous art and provides no information. We stop off at the Shawbost Norse Mill and Kiln, a bit of a stretch in that both are totally “renovated” thatched buildings, one being used as a storage hut, and the other not doing much. We stop at the Blackhouses at Gearrannan, a village that rents blackhouses to holiday makers. It has two others with lots of historical items and information. The blackhouse structure dates back to when people lived with their animals in the same chimney free building. Gearrannan also has a tea shop in one of the buildings, making for a fun lunch break.

Inga is pretty spry for eighty-eight. She doesn’t move fast but she gets to everyplace on our stops. She also has lots of tales to tell which spices up the long rides in between sites. Our last stop is The Blackhouse in Arnol. You’d think that one Blackhouse would be much like another but not so. This one was inhabited by a crofting family until 1966. They moved out and the house was preserved as they left it. It feels like you are walking into someone’s home. The museum has done a nice job of rounding out the experience with information, including audios. I head towards the entrance. The animals live off to the right. I turn left. The peat fire is burning in the centre of the living area. A pot is hanging above it. The inside is smoky. It’s dark, too, since there are no windows. A lamp lights the inside showing a dresser with beautiful crockery on display. Because of the thick walls and restored roof, no wind enters. It’s quite snug and comfortable. A bed is in the corner. People used to gather here in the evenings and sing, dance, and tell stories…even though the ministers didn’t much like it. Sound familiar?

Inga and I make it up the road to the bus stop where we are joined by other folks. The bus arrives on time and speeds its way towards Stornoway. We travel along twenty-three kilometres of peat. Relentless, boggy, peat. There is enough of the stuff to fuel Lewis into the next millennia. We crest a rise, overlook the airport and secret air force base, and head down into Stornoway. I am singing on the way home having had a spectacular day, accomplishing more sightseeing than imaginable when I departed this morning. Tomorrow it is the ferry back to Ullapool and northward. To the sound of a small drum banging in the distance, I crawl into bed.

The ferry leaves at 7am, meaning I need to be there at 6. Which I am. I love ferries. I especially love watching the cars load. I get called on first with the bike and, most times, get to watch an Occupational Safety and Health circus. The CalMac personnel direct each vehicle into the hold of the ferry. They point which lane you are meant to go to, often the first point of disorder. When you get to the end of the lane, there is a CalMac loader standing right in front of your car. He then waves you forward, towards himself. I think the idea is that this is meant to instil confidence. That is, he is certainly not going to urge you forward into his legs. Thus, you can believe your car is protected through the exercise. The problem is that this model assumes the drivers are normal.

I am here to tell you that many of the tourist drivers have never been on a ferry. They are driving a rental car. They are usually yelling at each other in the car because they are so stressed out. I have seen some magnificent domestics occur in the ferry hold. Some drivers are spatially clueless, and I am sorry if I offend Asians here but my observations would identify that as one group that qualifies. Germans think they know better and ignore the loaders. Americans think they own the boat. Under stress, every stereotype is confirmed. Fat people are deluded into thinking that when the car is parked 20cm from the wall that they can open the door and get out. Dogs are barking, and dog owners yell at each other and not the dog. Kids are screaming, fling open the car doors, and run wild through the hold.

Meanwhile, a CalMac loader is standing in front of the car trying to get the driver to move as close as possible to the vehicle in front of it so that everyone fits. The only people who should “fit” are the ferrymen. Time and time again I watch them gently, kindly, softly encourage a driver to do this or that…while standing in front of the car. I chat with one CalMac crewman on this trip and observe that he takes his life in his hands every day. I am expecting a response of “stupid tourist drivers.” But, no. What he says is, “The poor dears are afraid for their cars, and I don’t blame them. But it is verra, verra stressful.” Amazed by this generosity of spirit, I run upstairs for a bacon butty, coffee, and a beautiful return trip to Ullapool.





CHAPTER XXI. Assynt





When I arrive in Ullapool, I am sad because I have decided not to go to Knockan Crag National Nature Reserve. This is the information centre for the Geopark. By now you know things geological interest me. The Reserve has a small interpretive centre and a spectacular view of the Moine Thrust Belt. It shows older rocks that have been moved west and over the top of younger rocks due to tectonic action. It is here in Scotland that the fight took place over historical geological dogma (rocks don’t move) and concluded that rocks do, indeed, bend and fold. All the information has led me to believe that Knockan Crag is where you get to see this. The only place. In Scotland. (I didn’t say I was an informed geological aficionado). Aside from Knockan Crag being on a major NC500 road, it is not the direction I want to go. Damn.

I leave the ferry staging area and head right on Shore Street. I stop to take one last look up Loch Broom, absorb the spectacular view, and spy a tourist sign mounted on the seawall. I love tourist information signs. This one is about THE MOINE THRUST! Be still my heart. The sign explains all about the Moine Thrust and, pictorially shows where it is. It is…wait for it…right across Loch Broom on the other side. I look, and it is damned obvious. On the high hills across the loch are a layer of rising grey rocks, then a nice, very big, green intrusion, and then more grey rock. The green is vegetation that grows on the different rock intruding, containing limestone and making the plants happier to grow there than the Moine schists. Life is complete.

I’ve seen most of what Ullapool has to offer. Elated at my Moine Thrust find, and with lots of time left in the day, I make a quick run to Tesco, and head north on a main highway. Aside from being busy, it goes straight up. The view is of Harris and Lewis and, most probably, a view I will never see again. Nor is it likely I will get to the Hebrides again in my lifetime, which is a double edged sword. It is beautiful there. But, it will change and, I am thinking, not in a good way. I am getting depressed. Time to find tea and cake. At Ardmair, the nominated tea shop does not exist anymore. The next twelve kilometres is a really long, slow grind up, with one spectacular outlook, and another promised tea shop at Drumrunie. This also does not exist. North of Ullapool is not where tourists go. They go back to Inverness. I am headed into the wilderness, sort of, where civilised opportunities such as shops and tea houses are rare finds. What replaces these creature comforts is spectacular beauty. But for now, I am thinking tea and cake would be nice.

I swing left at Drumrunie onto a dotted line road. On the OS maps this is a road of less than four metres width. Sometimes, less than two metres width as I discovered on Harris. Although the traffic will be sparse on my way to Achiltibuie, it will be comprised primarily of local residents and commercial delivery vehicles, both driving like bats out of hell. I see death in my future. What I find is a series of lochs bordered on both sides by 700+m high peaks. The road is relatively flat. What little traffic passes does so with generosity. The view is breathtaking. My breath is also partially gone because it has been a long day. I am not going to make it to Achiltibui. Up to this point, the landscape has been very unforgiving from a camping point of view unless you can sleep hanging off a cliff or floating in a bog. Then I turn a corner, spot a cluster of trees on Loch Lurgainn, and find the campsite of my dreams. Flat, well drained, a view to die for, and a burn. I hunker down for the night.

Next morning is cold. Cold means I have absolutely no interest in doing anything other than packing up, getting on the bike, and riding to warm up. Breakfast takes a back seat. The road follows a series of lochs and stays flat as a pancake. The last loch has a small wooden row boat at its edge. Tempting. I ride into Achiltibui and find several marvels. One is a community that has everything, strung on a road overlooking the stunning Summer Isles. One of the “everythings” would be the “Achiltibui Piping School Café.” I assumed this would be a piping school. I am never clear on this. There is piping memorabilia here and it has enough room that one would think that it might be a non-café hours piping school. But the puzzle remains to this day. What it is, is a damn fine café. The prices are rock bottom and the menu is very interesting. However, I am planning a different lunch.

I tuck into a late breakfast tea and cake, especially wonderful because it has been three days in coming, and take in the view over the Summer Isles. These are a conglomeration of islands that are described as “a large archipelago located south of Westeros and Essos and west of Sothyros.” That description to me says “very remote.” It’s a real hassle to get out there. I won’t be going but take in the view from my crumb laden table. Across the street is Achiltibui Artists. Mind you, only 300 people live in Achiltibui. The gallery has some lovely works, including paintings, sculpture, jewellery, and crafts. All are top quality. I spend a good hour here, very pleasantly surprised.

Enough time has now passed to move on to the main gustatory event, the Salt Seafood Kitchen. I heard about this restaurant, or whatever it was, when I was in Ullapool. The tourist centre told me that it is a fabulous place to eat. I have now biked, say, fifty kilometres from Ullapool to a town of 300 people located on a dead end road. With every kilometre my expectations are dropping. This isn’t even a fishing port. Where is the seafood coming from? I try to be happy with just the breakfast tea and cake.

Oh ye of little faith. I am early. Someone comes out and asks if I mind waiting a bit while they get organised in what is a very small building. I am just glad they exist and appreciate their kindness in letting me know I wasn’t going to freeze to death for hours waiting. The menu is promising. I pick four things from it. The Cullen Skink (smoked haddock soup) is exquisite. The cold salmon divine. They don’t have squat lobster but the langoustine more than make up for it, fresh and perfectly cooked. The crusty bread is real bread. I can’t stop. I vaguely remember falling into a torpid stupor and ordering dessert as well. The experience was mind-numbing. Perhaps the 250g of butter I ingested? I haven’t had seafood this good since Kishorn Seafood Bar and that was spectacular. (Salt’s owner-chef Suzie Macgregor cut her teeth at Kishorn). To find this place in such a remote location adds dimensions to my good fortune.

The only downside to the whole adventure is that afterwards I have to ride seven kilometres to a campground. I toy with the idea of asking if I can set up my tent in Salt’s parking lot so that I don’t kill the seafood buzz, but decide a light ride might help jiggle everything down. Sated, I clamber onto my bike and coast back down through Achiltibui and on to Altandhu. Except for the hill midway, it is a pleasant ride. The last bit is a gradual coast down into the campground where I find super clean facilities and a tent spot out of the wind that overlooks Lewis. A pub up the hill serves more food, as if I have not had enough. They open at 6pm. I am there.

The sun is out and the wind is its usual low morning volume. The trip out of town is by a different route over Cnoc Breac with its glorious overview of the Summer Isles. The ride up is not very steep, but I have not recovered from my previous day’s excess of 23,420 calories. The ride along the Brae of Achnahaird with its tidal wetlands and dunes, is a pleasant ride with the wind at my back. I re-join the main road, pass the boat house and boat (still tempting), taking a left to Lochinvar.

The tone of this ride is changing. The houses are few and far between. The vistas broad and varied. It is not mountainous, although the hilly stretch ahead is very much up and down with short, sharp hills. Climbing up to a 132 metre rise, the road then goes down to the River Polly and a working fish farm. It ascends, steeply this time, to a road along small lochs with a grand view in the distance of larger ones. At one point, I hear a vehicle behind me and pull over only to discover it is a serious cyclist on a road bike huffing up the hill. He stops and asks if I am OK. We both laugh when I tell him he sounded like a car.

The landscape is as pock-marked as Harris with bigger lochs, green, and beautiful. Few cars are on this road, and fewer delivery vans. I stop whenever they approach because the road is barely wide enough for two bikes, let alone a car and something else. This is not on the NC 500, a blessing that makes the ride even more pleasant. Scrub trees line the road. At first I think they are a second growth and then realise they are scrub because of the wind and weather. It could be lonely here, but because the road goes between low hills on both sides, it feels comforting and safe. That may also be because the wind is blocked out. I have come to realise that strong wind stirs something primeval, much like happens to animals. It is not the noise it creates, per se. It is the unsettledness. The potential danger. The disruption in order. I feel safe in this valley, an infrequent experience in the wilds of the Highlands.

Unexpectedly, the vista opens up to Loch an Eisg Brachaudh with a solitary house in the distance and small islands. This is a sea loch although the tides do not seem to be more than two metres. A short stone wall now edges the road on the seaward side. It is less than knee height and doesn’t look strong enough to stop a car. I keep well away because I would end up in the drink. Where streams come into lochs is where things happen, in part because the estuarine ecology provides food. Looking out, I see a disturbance in the water. It’s as if a whirlpool has formed from nowhere. Then it stops. It moves. The whirlpool starts again. Soon, a dark head pops out of the water. It’s a seal snapping up all kinds of rich delicacies. It sees me and goes right back to what it was doing. Feeling fortunate and at peace, I sit on the wall and watch it for a long, long time.

The road hugs the rocks on my right. Here is a very small margin of error for anyone driving along. They would need to have their nose focused on the road. On the bike, I am fortunate enough to be able to stop, frequently, and absorb the intricate coastline and islands, all uninhabited. It is desolate, but a different kind of desolation. It’s warmer and more inviting. I can never put my finger on why that is. Maybe it’s the intimacy created by the scrub trees and low hills that dissipate any wind, and look lovely in so doing. Maybe it’s the water that is flat and calm because the coastline protects it. For whatever reason, I am grateful to have discovered it.

Of course the problem with being at sea level is that the next part of the ride is up. The hill is small but the way up is steep, as in twelve degree grade with a similar descent on the other side into Inverkirkaig. As I come screaming down the hill, the road comes to a parking lot that is the jumping off point for a three kilometre walk up to the Falls of Kirkaig, a very dramatic torrent of water that cascades down sixty metres. The intersection also has a sign for ice cream on a side road to the right. Guess which way I am headed? Descriptions of Inverkirkaig include remote, unpopulated, tiny crofting community. You get the idea. What descriptions don’t often mention is that here, in the middle of nowhere again, lives a treat.

This time, it’s a bookshop. Not a tiny bookshop, either. Some people grumble that it does not carry all the latest releases, but really. The population of Inverkirkaig is eleven on a good day. I rummage around in the bookshop for an hour. Lots of interesting books about Scotland and also popular offerings. Gifts are available, too, and I buy something tiny, small, that fits on my bike, and…is edible. Shortbread. This I stash away for future consumption since I am now working on tea and cake. The bookshop has a sizeable café. Sadly, both are for sale. I desperately would like to think it is an economic marvel that could exist in the middle of nowhere, on a road that has no traffic, and in a hamlet with no people. Ah, probably not. I follow the bubbling, rocky River Kirkaig and a long, pebbly beach out of town.

What is near is Lochinvar, a booming metropolis by comparison. I can tell I am close because the mini-road now has a pathway and pedestrian fencing on the right. Lochinver, on Loch Inver (clever that), has a significant commercial fishery. This is announced by the large warehouse with many tractor trailer loading docks where fish and molluscs are loaded for transport far, far away. Nothing is processed here. That is all taken care of at the other end. This gives the commercial end of the community, and others I will visit, an odd feeling. When the boats (and trucks) are in, it’s a vibrant, exciting feeling. When they are not, it is damned depressing. Lochinver overcomes this economic schizophrenia by having a very large, exciting tourist economy. It is on the North Coast 500. Given it is the biggest population centre for a long way, I find restaurants, butcher, greengrocer, two groceries, chandlery, oddments shops, and news agent (shocker).

My first job is find the Lochinver Mission. As I travel north, finding things becomes harder and harder because communities are so small and intimate, people expect you to know where everything is. I suppose in a car this is not a big deal because you drive up to the information centre and ask. At the end of a long day on a bike, my brain is usually as dead as my legs. Thus, no road signage and no building signage = abject confusion. I ride right by the place several times, explaining how I also discovered the fishing fleet and commercial trucks were not in, and finally head to what looks like a good place to ask questions. It is. It is the bunkhouse, located above a café. The building once was part of the Royal National Mission to Deep Sea Fisherman that provides support to fishing communities. They decamped in 2008 and the community took it over and turned it into a community social hub. It’s a warm, busy place and the welcome is grand, as is my very nice room. I settle in for the night.

Make that two nights. I ride down to the post office in the non-fishing end of town and discover that, due to cuts, the post mistress now spends a morning and couple of afternoons in the outlying post offices. She is out gallivanting this afternoon and tomorrow morning. The PO will open again tomorrow afternoon. Since I have a self-sent treasure trove package waiting for me, I am stuck. Not a bad place to be stuck, though.

I go to the first grocery store and load up on fixings for a feast. When I get back to the Mission (the name making me feel about as homeless as I really am), my only hostel mate has come in from trout fishing. He spends a week each year in Assynt fishing. It didn’t dawn on me that all those small lochs in the pock-marked moonscape have fish. Nice fish, I am told, and he offers me a large, pink, trout fillet to prove it. The kitchen is a little, well, untidy. I say this because I put my newspaper on the table and, then, can never get the last page unstuck from the surface. I don’t know whether to attribute this to my hostel mate, the cleaners, or both. I have seen worse (haven’t I?). My dinner plans captivate. The pitcher plant quality of the table surface does not disturb (that much). After a large glass of wine and vigorously scrubbing the table down with antibacterial soap, I eat my four courses in gustatory glory while overlooking a very handsome loch.

One doesn’t drink alcohol much on bike trips if one wants to survive. Glad I have a day to recover. Today I wander downtown and walk in through every door that will let me in. I haven’t seen this much stuff since Stornoway. Its charm is that it is all so compact. I also get the distinct feeling this is the end of the earth. Like, I am never going to be able to get marine supplies anyplace north of here…or fresh vegetables. I definitely feel the two-tiered level of living. One level is tourists and tourist stuff: B&B’s, nice restaurants, hotel, and souvenir shops. Second level is a community that is really proud of itself but struggling a bit to retain its specialness. I go to the Tourist Information Centre expecting the usual nothingness with a rack full of brochures. The Centre does, indeed, have brochures. It also is chock full of exhibits with a cadre of volunteers who are glowing with local pride. Assynt seems more to them than lots of scrub tress, rock, and open land. This seems unusual until I understand. They own Assynt.

Assynt is one of the leading areas of community land ownership in Scotland. I do not know how they have done it, but they have jumped on every opportunity imaginable to acquire major tracts of land. In 1992, the Assynt Crofters’ Trust took title to North Assynt Estate (21,300 acres). The Culag Woodlands thirty-six hectares went into long term lease with the Culag Community Woodland (CCWT) Trust in 1995. CCWT then acquired the 2,900 acre Little Assynt Estate in 2000. The community talked the John Muir Trust into purchasing Quinag Estate, 8,400 acres, in 2005 including Quinag Mountain (809m). This was because they were already very busy buying the Glencanisp and Drumrunie Estates (44,594 acres), a £2.9m purchase concluded that same year. In 2011, the Assynt Community Association bought Culag Park, a public open space that abuts the Mission.

None of this was easy going, including a great deal of hard ball that the Visitor Centre describes with enthusiasm. The result is very impressive. The impetus was a pride in community and fear that purchase by disinterested absent landowners would undermine that. I would say the clearances in this area of Sutherland would give a fair reason for that fear. Thanks to all their hard work, from this point onward most of what I am going to be looking at on either side of the road is community owned. I leave the Visitor Centre with a very different appreciation of Assynt and its residents. Remember that trout fillet? That trout was caught in one of their lochs. I like that. Very much.

The next day dawns grey, but not rainy. I stop in the other grocery store and load up on silly things that will make a long ride entertaining because today I am headed north towards Kylesku. Kylesku is so small that no population data are available. It is twenty kilometres from where I am, over a mountain pass. Between Lochinver and Kylesku there is…nothing. Well, Ardvreck Castle is along the way, a pile of rocks on the shores of Loch Assynt. Probably more sheep, too, which I have stopped commenting on because they are as abundant as flies.

I have two travel options. One is over the mountain pass mentioned above. The other is along the coast on a road with spectacular scenery. It is, unfortunately, part of the NC500. This is not what is stopping me though. Remember Scottish George from Ardnamurchan? Scottish George travels everywhere on his bike. He is very experienced and very strong. He took this NC500 road. He told me he did it on a bet (someone said there was no way he could do it on a bike). So George, being sensible, took the bet. He told me at one point he wept. Not only are there double arrows on the map. There are double arrows on the double arrows.

Mountain pass it is.





CHAPTER XXII. Reay Forest





On the “easy” way, the first stop is Skiag Bridge, a name at the crossroads fourteen kilometres away. Nothing between Lochinver and there has a name. The map people put “Skiag Bridge” at a point on the road so there was something to identify in all that blank space. There is good news, though. In its efforts to support the commercial fishing business in Lochinver, the government has built a humdinger of a road between Lochinver, Skiag Bridge, and points south. I haven’t seen two lanes in a week. Also, no traffic.

I follow the River Inver down to Loch Assynt and take in the view. Quinag Mountain is on my left somewhere but I can’t see it yet for the trees. Canisp is on my right, a majestic range that follows right along the loch. Canisp is also owned by community land trusts in Assynt. Very heartening to know it won’t be despoiled. As I ride along, I realise I am the only person within kilometres and kilometres. Welcome to the wilderness. No wonder a magical mermaid is supposed to live here. When the waters of the loch rise, the locals say she is crying.

I am going to be crying. This may be a better choice overall from a trip route perspective given Scottish George’s experience, but as I look at the road I now see Quinag. I also see a sinuous ride up to the 261 metre pass between it and Glas Bheinn. It’s windy, although thankfully sunny. Sort of. Oddly, so very oddly, it is sunny on the right hand side of the road. The left hand side of the road is overcast with growing black clouds. The demarcation is unbelievably distinct. My thoughts are bad weather is moving in, and I better hustle. I take a brief peek at Ardvrack Castle, slightly more interesting than a pile of rocks, and start my ascent.

I stop at a turnoff 500 metres along the way because I have to pee. I pee a lot, mostly because I try and stay hydrated and what else do you have to do on these long rides? I only mention this because here, in the wilderness, there are only three people. Me and the two people in the car who drive right up to me, get out of their car, and start wandering around. I am so tempted. If I pull my pants down will they realise what colossal duffusses they are? The sheep five kilometres away on the opposite hillside would get a free show because there is nothing to hide behind (pun intended). These two would certainly figure out what was going on. But I can’t do it. They do not go away. I have to keep riding or blow up.

Some people are just unbelievably stupid. “Christopher, what do you think that cyclist is doing over there at the side of the road with a giant roll of toilet paper?” “Well, Judi, I just don’t know. Let’s go see. Don’t say anything when you get out of the car. Just look and see if it really is toilet paper.” “Great idea, sweetheart. Let’s go!” Three hundred metres on, there is a side track that I run up (mind you, no trees and totally visible). Christopher and Judi finally leave, head up the mountain, and wave to me and my roll of toilet paper as they pass by.

Meanwhile, the sun is getting brighter (on the right) and the clouds are turning black (on the left). I pass another chambered cairn. Perhaps there is some mystical component to the cairns and mermaids. It’s a magical place for me, even grinding uphill. Quinag looks unbelievably huge, jutting right out of the landscape. It is not a place I would want to climb. Speaking of climbing, I read the map wrong. Since I was starting at seventy-one metres, as opposed to the usual sea level, the pass is a lot less challenging than I thought. It’s gradual and the ride down the other side is fabulous. I stop multiple times just to take in the beauty of the place. I am a couple of hours into this and the right hand/left hand weather is still holding. Some kind of weather pattern must develop here that causes this. I am hoping that rain won’t be pouring on me. Those hardy climbers on my left, though, are headed towards dark Quinag and unless I miss my bet, they are going to be sorry they didn’t pick sunny Glas Bheinn across the street. But Glas Bheinn isn’t a Munro.

I wave goodbye to Canisp in the background and look down on Loch Glencoul as I coast down towards Kylesku. But first, a small stop. Unexpectedly a Geopark Centre presents itself. It says it is a Geopark Centre even though it is never mentioned in any of the 10,000 tourist brochures that have passed through my hands. The Centre has tea and fantastic cake as well as a lovely café manager who fills my thermos with hot water. A small interpretive area explains the Moine Thrust. The café window overlooks Loch Glencoul and an even better example of the Moine Thrust than Ullapool. Giant chunk of rock in between two other giant chunks of rock. Rock sandwich. To think I thought I had to go to Knocken Crag. Sometimes the karma does work out.

Sadly, Kylesku is something of a disappointment. Kylesku is a tour boat and a hotel. That’s it. The hotel looks very nice but pricy. I am discovering what a sensible person already knows: lodging in out of the way places is expensive. I continue to be surprised when I ask room tariffs and am quoted three digits, sometimes starting with a “2.” With no guarantee you even get an ensuite. It’s been a long day. The café manager at the Geopark Centre tells me there is a bothy across the loch. I am enchanted by that road across the way because it is not a real road. It is a track. Tracks always prove to be interesting, this one especially so because it includes a waterfall.

I cross the Kylesku Bridge, a quite spectacular piece of engineering. It crosses 130 metres of loch while taking a wide bend. In the parking lot is a memorial to the XIIth Submarine Flotilla. These were miniature submarines that trained and operated out of this area before being sent off to attack German battleships off Norway. The mountains behind the memorial look like extinct volcanoes, which they are. The remains of a broch are on the left. On the right is a road that goes into the Reay Estate offices.

After one false start that involves climbing straight up a dirt track that proves to be the wrong one, I ride down to the shore and follow a very rough dirt track along the northern shore of Loch Glendhu. The track rises up off the water. I get off and walk because falling means ten metres straight down onto rocks. These types of tracks always seem longer to travel because every step is a mystery. Partway along a very major dirt road appears. It is construction traffic worthy. It’s an engineered road and not on my map, adding to the mystery. I pass an incredibly ratty building on the right (the bothy I am looking for). For whatever reason, I decide to keep going to the waterfall. I know I am exhausted, but I have convinced myself that camping next to a waterfall will be a terrific way to spend a night.

It might be if the waterfall weren’t part of a hydroelectric complex. I am five kilometres into this “track” adventure and nobody has any idea I am here. If I trip and knock myself senseless, I will be eaten by sheep. As I look further up Loch Glendu I see roiling, black, turbulent clouds with lightning bolts shooting out of them. This mess is headed my way. I scurry along the road to the waterfall and discover. Well, you already know. But you don’t know the magnitude. First, there is a building below the falls that evidently is some kind of substation. It has a foreboding air around it, perhaps all those signs saying “High Voltage. You Will Die.” The building is emitting an 80dB hum. That’s downstream. Upstream of the bridge where I am standing is the waterfall. Except you can’t see it: the intake feeder for the upstream building is sucking all the life out of it. This small upstream building is emitting jet engine sounds. The wind has really picked up, being driven by the cyclonic gale behind it. This is open land. The sheep field next to the substation is my first choice only to find it is right in the path of the wind. I try down by the substation but no place to anchor the tent. I finally opt for a turnaround across from the jet engine sounding building. It doesn’t sound that loud. The rain starts to pitter-patter. I jump into the tent and discover several things.

First, I discover that this location is the etymological equivalent of Woodstock. I am covered in bugs. I am the food court for this concert. One expects midges in Scotland, especially towards the end of the day. One does not expect them in the pouring rain. They are matted on my arms and legs. They are also matted on my clothes where there is no blood for them to suck. This is because they have been pushed off any free millimetre of skin by the ticks. I look like poppy seed cake. As the rain pours outside, I spend the next forty-five minutes smooshing midges and plucking off ticks, which I toss out the tent door only to have the next wave of midges fly in. It’s a bloodbath. Finally, 99% of them are out the door.

The rain tapers off. I have to pee. I try to hold it in, wishing that Christopher and Judi were here to provide an alternative food court distraction for the blood sucking bugs. I know in my logical mind there is no way I am going to last all night in this tent without peeing. I may as well go out now, while there is light, and do the deed. Maybe I can start up the stove and get some hot water, too. HA! I hop out and am transformed to a solid black etymological spectacle by the number of bugs that fasten on to my clothes. I was at least sensible enough to cover up the raw flesh. Except, of course, for my face I have smeared with bug dope in the hopes this will help. It does not. Thank God for the café manager’s thermos donation because no stove is happening tonight.

Next, I learn thing number two: the sides of a tent act as an echo magnifier for jet engine sounds. I think the tent sides are resonating. My head certainly is because it feels like it is stuck right into the workings of a Boeing 747 engine. I will soon be deaf, with either my eardrums blown out or brain pureed. After the final march of death smearing midge bodies onto my clothes, I crawl into my sleeping bag and pull it over my head. This has absolutely no sound dampening effect. I pull out half my clothes and wrap them around my head. Then I worry about suffocating and nobody ever finding me. I think this in a moment of panicked insanity so my adrenaline starts to run wild. I am never going to get any sleep. And, no I am not because the jet engine noise gets louder as the water from the rain swells the stream. The jet engine sound gets louder, and louder. The ground shakes. I am thinking I should eat the bug dope and end it all. I decide to sing songs to myself just to keep from going crazy and in about eight hours, fall asleep.

The sun comes out. As I tentatively look out the door with the hopes that something will have improved, I discover that the bug concert is still going on. I smear myself with carcinogenic loads of bug dope, jump out of the tent and do the quickest decamping of my life. I push the bike up the hill. The bugs disappear. The jet engine noise fades in the distance. I see a bit of waterfall. So much for that adventure.

Of course, I am starving. I eat a lot on this trip. It is amazing how much food you can eat and (a) not put on weight and (b) not blow up. However, freeze dried food does have some amazing properties. I will leave those to your imagination. I pedal uphill for a while and discover a parking lot that has been crafted with benches. It has a great view of the whole Kylesku area. The benches and surrounding stone wall provide a terrific windbreak. I pull out the stove, discretely smother the post-priming flames on the smouldering bench, and have tea and oatmeal to occasional weird stares of passers-by.

Breakfast done, I continue along a newish dual carriageway which makes no sense because of the remoteness. If I see ten cars a day it’s a busy day. The road is cut through many rock outcrops, nicely graded, smoothly surfaced, and an easy ride. The landscape has evened out as well. Not flat, but broad with interesting hills and valleys. I am leaving the big mountains behind me and see interesting rocky undulations in the distance and moorland along the road. No trees, but very green. Lochs of random sizes are scattered everywhere. The sky has opened up as well and looks bigger. The road ahead is less a mystery because I can often see, for kilometres ahead, where I am going. It is wonderful that I can be so happy riding along this road with its relentless beauty, because civilisation is a long way away. Next stop Scourie.





CHAPTER XXIII. Sutherland





The name Scourie sounds like a cleaning product and puts me off. I ride through a settlement that might be Scourie but with no campground, which is what I am looking for. One house has a hand written sign out front for smoked salmon, though. Then I sweep around the corner and see a gem of civilisation. The sun shines on a sandy bay, bringing out the cobalt blue. The bay is embraced by the distant rocky hills, each small but unique. Inland are green pastures. Magic. The infrastructure improves with a pedestrian path and street lights. This looks promising. The last stretch of road is a nice long run downhill. I pass the entrance to Scourie Beach and the burial ground, located on a promontory that protects the town/hamlet from the seas.

The campground, complete with pub, abuts Scourie Bay. Reception isn’t open. A sign instructs me to find my own place. I find a beautiful patch of grass with bushes that provide a windbreak. Up goes the tent and the start of recovering from hell night. The view out the tent door is gorgeous, especially because a cloud of midges is not trying to get in. The grass is cut, so no ticks. Downtown calls, all two stores of it. The first is Outdoor House and Filling Station. The Outdoor House part is closed. Filling Station part is a twenty-four hour affair, the importance of which cannot be overstated. I expect you have grasped the very long distances between services in the Highlands. Towns with stores and post offices may not have filling stations. In this part of the world, petrol stops are paramount which may explain why downtown appears to be thriving. Walking past the Scourie Hotel, I see the very tidy store/post office ahead. Fresh vegetables, fresh milk, and a creditable stock of items. That’s not the surprise, though. The surprise is that it is open on Sundays. I have evidently travelled far enough from the grasp of the Presbyterians that this hedonistic grocery shop is open seven days a week. No singing and dancing allowed inside, though.

The next day is Sunday. I walk in glory to the grocery store and load up. Then off to the burial ground, observing the trip’s oldest aged tombstone date of 103 years and a generally long-lived population contained within its walls. The size and intricacy of the monuments divulge a local surfeit of tombstone carvers. It’s as if it were “War of the Tombstones” from the degree of elaboration. I find tombstones of three carvers, two with different surnames, supporting this observation. As I head back to my tent, I am once again mystified by the beach. I cannot figure out why sandy beaches seem to get so much attention here. Nobody swims. It is too cold. The purpose of the beach appears to be for walking dogs.

I decide to do laundry and find no soap dispenser. As always happens in my travels, a fellow traveller runs over to their caravan, gives me soap, and refuses payment. The pub has Wi-Fi allowing me to plot out the days ahead. I am on a 3:1 schedule. If I live in my tent for three days, I give myself a roof on the fourth. Trying to find a roof in the kilometres ahead, though, is a knotty problem. I make the problem more difficult by drinking lots of beer and eating various appetisers. The Old Schoolhouse is both near the road I am taking and commended. They have a room available at a two digit price and, thankfully, a restaurant into which I book. Tomorrow is looking great. I bet the room even has heat. I curl up with my pile of books and try to lighten the load by finishing at least one. The sound of the waves that night keeps me awake, for a while, because it is so lovely I don’t want to miss it.

Today starts off well with sun, a junk food stop, and a flat road. One puzzle that continues to greet me is whether the road signs are in miles or kilometres. Not far regardless. The road follows Loch A’ Bhadaidh Daraich (I put these names in so you can play around with trying to pronounce them because I can’t). On the far shore of this narrow loch are rock outcroppings that look like they have been here since the beginning of time, which is an accurate description. In the far distance is a hill/mountain that looks just like a volcano.

At the end of the loch I see…say what is that? It looks like a road that goes straight up to the top of that escarpment. I grab my map and, sure enough, there is an arrow meaning a long, gruelling walk up. This time, jammed against a cliff with no verge, a ditch right next to the road, and a blind corner coming at me. Since the traffic volumes are higher here, it is very exciting. It is terrifying when the bus comes flying around the corner in the middle of the road. It’s amazing how fast I can push that laden bike when the adrenaline is flowing. When the road flattens out enough that I can ride, I get on the bike. My legs are so shaky I immediately fall off. One day it is going to be a broken hip but, thankfully, today is not that day. I apologise to my bike, and we walk some more until we have both regained our composure.

The ride is now through a valley, small rocky ridges on both sides and green vegetation along the road. Straight ahead in the distance are big mountains. Once was the time when I saw big mountains I would worry about having to ride up them. Time has shown that the Neolithics, their predecessors and successors, weren’t too keen on strenuous hill climbs either. A road, track, side route, or equivalent is always available and, while longer, often more exciting. So, I can enjoy the view and wonder just what those ancient looking mountains are.

Aside from the scenery, the ride is relaxing because I can’t get lost without a major effort. Few intersections appear and these are one track or dirt track and not where I know I am headed. Side tracks offer B&B’s since this is the NC500. The economy of this area appears to be totally reliant on tourism. As the immigration official said when asked, “How long can I stay?” “You can stay as long as you spend money.” Enlightened that (but probably not true). Even cheap me is contributing to the local Highland economy by depleting the store shelves of fresh milk and junk food with the occasional overnight lodging thrown in. I know from the information in Lochinvar that all is not well here, from the perspective of community vibrancy.

As I pass yet another lost sheep, I ponder the impact the Clearances have had to this day. Then again, aside from fishing which has been drastically curtailed through EU quotas, the opportunities for economic development seem awfully limited. I am sometimes amazed to see power poles and lines to the most remote of places. This is not matched by telecommunications and internet access. This limits the economic development capacity of the region. My expectations are that I will have bars on my phone in a place with a Post Office and, that’s it. So my trip from Scourie to the Old School House will be without any mobile service. Which is why I carry that EPRB in my handlebar bag. It communicates to satellites. At least if I do end up with a broken hip, or sick and threatened by ravenous sheep, I can let someone know. And they will come. The emergency services here are unbelievable. On Harris, a conversation involved how many helicopter flights and/or boat transports were organised in a year to take sick/injured people to mainland medical services. A lot. I don’t want to be one of them, but it is comforting.

Part of why my mind is running this way is the landscape. It has such a primeval feel. Others have said this, too. You might say, rocks have feelings? I understand your scepticism. I am here to tell you, I now understand the mysticism of paganism and the local belief in faeries (not the Tinkerbell kind but the Scottish kind that take on different forms, including appearing as small men). Everything around me is ancient and thrumming with a low, low frequency. Perhaps it is the rocks which are the oldest on earth. Perhaps it’s the landscape itself that has been shaped by eons of weather, ice, and geologic action. It doesn’t look like anything else I have ever seen. Then there is the water everywhere in kettle holes or larger lochs. The east side of Harris looked like this. Here, though, that landscape is magnified by a factor of millions. Just when I think I have gotten the hang of what I will see next, I am surprised. I come over the rise and to my left is a mining/gravel operation. This is what the area would look like with business development. It is not a good look. Leaving that blight behind, I travel along a way, come over a rise, and meet a panoramic view of the volcano and its many relatives, in front of which is a loch. The sky is blue. The view goes on forever. I pull into a siding and have a seat.

My map shows me a large concentration of Munros, Corbetts, and Grahams ahead. It’s a spectacular display from where I sit, overlooking Laxford Bay and its tidal flats. My map also shows me a nice sharp grade out of the Laxford Bay area. After a suitable break, in the sun, I ride past the remains of the Badnabay chambered cairn that is little but rubble. Various Scottish agencies and groups have done a superlative job of cataloguing historic and prehistoric sites. This one is less impressive to look at but more impressive when I think about the community that must have lived here in Neolithic times, eating the shellfish from the tidal flats, fish from the bay, growing crops and raising animals on the surrounding fields. Having a chambered cairn means the population was settled. It is a superabundance of natural resources and spiritually arresting as well.

A house near the Laxford River is part of the Reay Forest Estate. Reay Forest is not community owned. Rather, it continues the centuries of aristocratic land occupation. I decide to peel back the layers. After my stay in Lochinver, who owns the land is becoming more interesting. The estate where I had my escapade in Kylestrome is the same outfit that owns this land. The Reay Estate is run as traditional sporting estate, explaining why the deer population of 3,000 - 3,500 is prominent on their web page. It comprises 96,000 acres. I can fish, shoot, and stalk but because it has loyal clientele, few vacancies are available. I bet not for me, ever. The price is not given, meaning if you have to ask you shouldn’t apply.

Peeling back more layers, I find Reay Forest Estate, and a whole lot more, is owned by the Grosvenor Estate, owned by the Grosvenor Family, and headed by The Duke of Westminster. Also known as twenty-six year old Hugh Grosvenor, worth US $16 billion and the world’s richest person under thirty. Also, Prince George’s godfather. Is this the type of absentee landlord that the Lochinver folk are worried about? I would be. I will not be stalking, shooting or fishing. I will be pushing my bike up the next hill and standing at the top, looking back over a stunning landscape and two gillie’s huts on Laxford Bay.

The turnoff for The Old Schoolhouse is in Rhiconich, only a few kilometres away. In that short way, the weather deteriorates. The rain starts. I stop at the Rhiconich Hotel to see if tea is on offer. Not only is it not, I can’t see that the Hotel offers much of anything other than an overnight bed. I am learning this, as well: lodging for one night is a bad deal. One is usually not allowed to front up until a time certain which is often not a time that works for me. If I ride out at 6am, I think 6 - 7 hours in the saddle is quite enough. Most lodgings will not let you in until 3pm. Then they kick you out at 10am. So, I try and book for two days to thwart them. If you are staying two days, they get less uppity about your arriving early, because they are making twice the money and only having to clean the room once. This approach works a treat once again at the Old School House, sort of. I arrive at 2pm. They let me put my bags in their laundry. However, no room until 3pm. It is pissing down rain, but I suit up and head to Kinlochbervie.

Kinlochbervie is a major population centre. At least it is on my map and in comparison to the wilderness that surrounds it. It has a big commercial fishery, a high school, and a pub where I plan to hide out. The ride along Loch Inchard is truly spectacular. The road is high above the loch and overlooks a dramatic landscape on the other side. Things then go pear-shaped. I get cold and fatigue descends like a runaway garage door. The hill into Kinlochbervie at fifteen degrees is so steep I have to walk down. My brakes are screaming, since I need to apply them while I descend, and the noise is shooting through my head. Now with a headache, I turn the corner, ride up a hill, and stop at a War Memorial. It is pouring. Three cars are parked at the War Memorial. What’s with that? Well, what’s with that is that this is the only place anyone can get cell phone reception. Everyone is texting away.

I ride down into the harbour anticipating busyness. Like Lochinver, the harbour is in the downside of its cycle. Nobody is here. No fishing boats. No trucks. No body. Empty. I run into the public toilet looking for heat. No heat. I look for the pub. I never find it. I figure that I have been skunked enough for one day, push the bike up that awful fifteen degree grade, and coast back down to The Old School House. Heat. Clean Sheets. Heat and more heat. Hot, hot shower. Dry clothes. I hang everything wet throughout the room. It looks like a Chinese laundry. All I have to do now is finish warming up and run across the way to dinner, wine, and some high calorie dessert. Dinner is exquisitely delicious, as is turning the heat on high, climbing under the fluffy duvet, and passing out.

Today I am meant to head to Sandalwood Bay, a beautiful, long beach that is located kilometres from the nearest road. When I wake up, I make a cup of tea and consider. First, I would have to tackle that fifteen degree hill. Second, I would have to tackle that fifteen degree hill. Third, ibid. I don’t know why this is such a barrier. Perhaps it is the weather. Perhaps it is the prize at the end. I am sick of beaches. Here, you can’t do anything at them but look. I live in Western Australia. You want to talk beaches? Of course there is a remote chance you might get eaten at one of ours (highly exaggerated). But you can swim and bob for hours, even days and years, until your time comes. In Scotland, you have four minutes before the water temperature freezes you to death. I have a big stack of books. I have the Old Schoolhouse restaurant which also serves lunch, a bit of a stretch after the breakfast I packed away. Oh, what the hell. I book in for dinner again, turn the heat down a tad because all the plastic in the room is starting to melt, snuggle under the covers, and while the day away.

I am very excited about today. It is today I make it to the northern end of Scotland on my trip, Durness to be exact. Something tells me this is going to be a good day. The way out of town is. It is as beautiful in reverse as it was in coming. I know a long climb is ahead, but it is a steady, gradual rise from sea level to 190 metres. The road becomes a single track. This size reduction is presumably because all the commercial trucks loaded with fish are heading south. For me, it is a more intimate ride since the road is an afterthought as opposed to the main event in the landscape. The first kilometres do not disappoint. I pass the omnipresent hydroelectric plant fed by a beautiful waterfall. This torrent of water must take out the road occasionally.

The road follows a steep ridge on the right, while on the left below a lush, green valley opens up. Two streams meet at the valley head, one from directly north and one from directly west. As I climb up high I can see the sea loch towards which their combined waters flow. While the land on my left is somewhat steep, the valley floor is relatively flat. The rocks on my right go up steeply, broken and scattered with vegetation poking out between. I follow the tributary north where it cascades madly over rocks on its rapid descent. A waterfall makes noise loud enough to be heard long before it is seen. As I get close to the height of land, I turn around and look back. The sky has opened up and the vista is huge. It seems I can see all the way back to Lochinvar, and maybe I can.

I ride a way further, and make a turn, where a vast moorland opens up. A woman hauls bags of peat to her car. We chat for a bit. It’s hard for me to keep my mind on the conversation because ahead of me are dark mountains, looming over a high loch. “Dramatic” is an understatement and, once again, I am lost for words. I repeatedly stop at the side of the road and try to take it all in. At the top is a newish house, a B&B. This must be one of the loneliest places imaginable in the dead of winter. I expect the view makes up for it. I am looking at Foinaven (911m) with its adjoining ridges of comparable height. Next is Cranstackie (801m). Between the two is the River Dionard, a top salmon river.

I am in Gualin Estate. The original estate was 800 square miles and has dwindled to its current 6,500 acres through partitioning and sale. This is the first place I have seen with prices: £420 per stag and £900 fishing, per two rod beat, rotating daily. For stag hunting you get an Argocat, stalker and gillie. I am thinking, if the price is per stag, you are likely to get one because of the economics of sending that gear and those people with you. For fishing, this pricing sounds like Sanskrit and a daunting price. I have concluded, probably incorrectly, that two of you get to go fishing for a week. It is fly fishing only and primarily catch and release. Lodging not included for either activity. I am agog. I can think of a lot of things to spend £900 on. None of them involve a fish I have to give back. (However, they will allow me to shoot and fish while the Reay Estate will not.) I understand the allure of the place in just the short time I ride through it. It is wild. It is ancient. It is brilliant.

After Gualin House the road starts down on a long gradual descent. At one point I can see the ocean in the distance. I stop at a water trough with the following inscription dated 1883: “As a mark of gratitude and respect to the inhabitants of Durness and Eddrachillis for their hospitality while projecting this road. This inscription is placed over this well by their humble servant, Peter Lawson, Surveyor.” Eddrachillis is south of Scourie and marked the southern end of the original Gualin Estate. A long way away. The water trough is charming and continues to be functional. I have a rest, a drink (not from the trough), and then continue on my eight kilometre coast downhill.

The valley to my right is broadening, the mountains becoming hills. The River Dionard gets bigger and flows more quickly under a bridge, next to which is inexplicably a public phone booth. I have seen exactly three houses since I left Richonich. Who would be calling from here? Sheep and a sheep barn make a sudden appearance, announcing that the wilderness ride is over. The final clue is that next to the broch, cairn, and chambered cairn is a communications tower. I have arrived at the Kyle of Durness, a coastal inlet comprised entirely of shifting sands. It is a kilometre wide in places and the channel is the comparable eye of a needle, moving on a daily basis. This is another area abounding in Neolithic remains, predictably appearing at sites rich in natural resources. I take a dirt track to Balnakeil Craft Village in search of Cocoa Mountain, said to serve the best hot chocolate on the planet. It is.

I might be depressed about being in Durness, the proverbial end of the trail, were it not for it having so many fascinating things to do. The bunkhouse is terrific. Even with a full house, I am in no rush to move on. The people staying here are absolutely fascinating. One lady has been here for weeks doing geological studies, so I pick her brain since everything geological is going on in this area. A mother and daughter team turn up who are completing their one month walk from Glasgow. The mother is well over fifty. The daughter is a vegan which, I think, made that trip a bit of a challenge but both are effervescently upbeat. The day they arrive, after walking tens of kilometres, they dump their packs and head off to Smoo Cave two kilometres away. I am too tired to get to Smoo Cave on my bike.

Not everyone comes this far north and, from my experience, the travellers are more intrepid and more interesting. It’s a fun place to stay with my local knowledge contribution being that no one should miss Cocoa Mountain. I visit the shop, many times since it is fifty paces from the bunkhouse. It has everything, including wine in little bottles, a size I adore and which keep me sober. I call and ask about the ferry ride to Cape Wrath, and it starts to sound like the boat to St Kilda. Can’t go. Too windy. Tide too low. So, I console myself by riding out to Balnakeil Craft Village, looking at half of the forty craft studios, having another hot chocolate, and finding Phil the Masseuse. As I enter Phil’s I reflect on what has become of me. Phil is fully studded and tattooed. He looks like a biker. I can’t see any credentials beyond the self-produced business card that says he is a masseuse. I don’t care. Who am I to contradict? I lie buck naked on his table and let him have his way with me.

Next day, I call the minibus people and scurry out to the ferry and Cape Wrath. We are going! Mind you, the ferry is from one side of the Kyle of Durness to the other. It’s what is on the other side that is of interest, a minibus ride to the lighthouse (Stevenson) at Cape Wrath. Cape Wrath is the furthest northwest point in Britain. Wrath is Norse for turning point, since Vikings coming from Norway would turn left to pillage the richer parts of Scotland, Wales and Ireland. On return, they turned right and headed home. We are headed across, specifically across a Ministry of Defence Weapons Range. This adds another layer of complexity to the tour schedule, but no live fire bombings today.

After a quick crossing in a very small boat, the tour follows above the Kyle. We can see the shifting sands and the way the water moves the channel, with the water being consistently low even at high tide. We cross the Daill River on a bridge that looks highly suspect and enter the Firing Range. Warships shoot onto the range, occasionally missing this fifty-nine square kilometre target. The land is pockmarked with big round holes. Our guide teaches us how to differentiate between old peat harvesting (straight edges) and bombs (round edges). He then reiterates how we are not to touch anything, pointing to a hand grenade that is less than 20cm from the road. The incongruity of all this is that much of the range and beyond is a Special Protection Area and Site of Specific Interest. The cliffs, just outside the range, are an important bird nesting colony. The 320 kilometre Cape Wrath Trail goes right through the range as does Scottish National Trail. My mother/daughter bunkmates walked right through here two days ago. Not me. Damn skippy I am staying in that minivan until we get to the lighthouse.

The lighthouse is something of a disappointment. It is very, very short at twenty metres. The logic was that the cliffs are so high, who needs a tall lighthouse? That may be the case but my problem is I cannot see the cliffs because I am standing on them. A foghorn is located on one of the edges. Generally we are cautioned to stay away from the edge and spend our time in the cafe. I have wanted to see the café primarily because the couple who runs it has lived out here for yonks and make their living operating the café and selling tourist souvenirs.

Their story caught my interest when the wife headed out to buy a Christmas turkey in 2010. It took her thirty days to get back because of weather that included snow. I wanted to see this place. John is very generous in letting me into his living quarters which looked much as they did when the lighthouse was built. Since they rent it from the Northern Lighthouse Board, neither side is going to invest much in improvements. The views are fabulous and include whales and dolphin on one side, deer on the other, and birds everywhere. John shares some good stories about the horrendous winds, given the lighthouse is the first structure the storms get to when roaring across the Atlantic. I see two ships navigate along the coast, bringing home that the lighthouse has a primary purpose that I seem to have forgotten. Everyone hops back in the minivan and we make it back to the ferry, which does a side trip to pick up someone on a boat moored in the Kyle. Having made it to my trip’s end, I ride my bike home satisfied indeed.

This morning is Smoo Cave. I hate caves but this is supposed to be spectacular. I take a ride in that direction and come across the community hall that is having morning coffee. I stop in and everyone looks at me like – you don’t live here. Well, no I don’t. One person tries to strike up a conversation but that involves explaining to me what coffee hour is about. It is about residents getting together once a month to talk about their life in Durness and sharing stories about that life. Right. I scarf down my tea and cookies, then redeem myself by buying two books from the donations library. Outside is a garden dedicated to John Lennon. Say what? John Lennon (yes, that John Lennon) had an auntie in Durness and spent his childhood summers here. The garden is a lovely tribute although most of the plants are growing at forty-five degrees because of the wind.

I get to Smoo Cave, a giant limestone cave with its mouth at the sea, and decide to take the coward’s way out. I hike on a trail that goes on the opposite cliff and look into it from a distance. I marvel that the main road has been constructed right over the limestone roof of Smoo Cave. I am glad I did not go in.

Back home, pack up, and wait for the bus south. The bus is a minivan, but I don’t care because it has a bike trailer. That means I don’t need to ride all the way back. As the driver loads my bike, I ask “Ever lose any?” His reply, “Not me,” does not inspire confidence. He then dobs in another driver who managed to lose the whole trailer on a curve. I make sure my bike is lashed down and the trailer chained on. We head off through the wilds of the Highlands in civilised comfort all the way to Inverness, then on to Glasgow, and home.





Epilogue





I feel like Alice. In reverse. Instead of falling down a rabbit hole filled with the surreal, bizarre, frightening, and untoward, I have fallen into a place that is calming, beautiful, and harmonious (as long as I don’t stick my oar in and try to control everything). I have never felt this safe in a world I thought was anything but. I am totally disoriented, due primarily to two compelling existential puzzles that have emerged.

Imagine looking at your bike with its handlebar bag, two panniers, expandable overflow bag, and realising: everything you need is on this bike. And, you are happy. Then imagine your home, its contents, everything you own including the things you cherish and the things that are clogging up your closet and ask: why do you need all that stuff? That is the first puzzle.

Imagine all the people you meet are just like you: kind, cranky, generous, grouchy, determined, lazy, reliable, and disoriented. Then imagine that, perhaps, the differences separating us are overshadowed by our collective humanity. Why is the world supposed to be such a fearful place if it is full of people just like you? That is the second puzzle.

Add to these the enduring questions: are there really otter in Scotland and what does black pudding taste like (and will I ever muster the courage to find out)?

What am I going to do about all this? The trip was meant to be a one-off, a chance to act on a lifelong dream. It was, but it has carried me to a different, unexpected dimension. Was it the timing? Was it because this type of travelling is more genuine than the life I left? Or is it Scotland, land of bagpipes, ferries, and so much more?




*** END OF THIS TEXT Bagpipes and Ferries   ***