Title:Last Train to Cairo
Author:Cohen, Paul Q.
Gender of Author:Male
Publication Year:2021
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2021
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: B041
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/Last-Train-Cairo-Touring-Century-ebook/dp/B093YSBCD7/ref=zg_bs_159937011_sccl_2/139-3701956-5459953?psc=1


*** START OF THIS TEXT Last Train to Cairo  ***


Welcome to Egypt





Flight 155 landed in Cairo well after midnight. The plane rolled through the darkness for so long that I wondered whether the pilots were lost. I certainly was. I peeked through a tiny window next to my seat, looked for a terminal, but found none. A long while later, we lurched to a stop on some dark corner of the tarmac, miles from civilization. When the cabin lights flickered to life, I caught my reflection in the window and groaned. I looked awful – worse than usual anyway. I had dozed off somewhere over the Mediterranean. My hair stuck to my forehead, drool stained my cheek, and someone spilled pretzel crumbs all over my shirt. Teresa fared a little better. She had fallen asleep on my shoulder, but at least she had sense enough to drool on me instead of herself.

Our trip to Egypt started at a sidewalk café in Lisbon, a few days earlier. We were hiking the Camino de Santiago, a five-hundred-mile pilgrimage across Portugal and Spain. We had one-way tickets and planned a month on the road. Our friends and family asked for postcards and pictures, and they wished us the best of luck. A few days later, my feet cried mercy and our trip was over. We sat at that café for hours. Teresa wouldn’t talk to me. I scrambled for ideas, and after a long while found one that stuck. What about Egypt? I knew that Teresa had always wanted to see the pyramids, and for the first time that afternoon, she looked up at me. We booked our flights that night, and two days later, we flew to London, then Cairo. We told our friends and family about the change in plans. Don’t go to Egypt, they warned us, it’s not like it used to be. We didn’t listen, we never do.

We traveled to Egypt with no plan, no reservations, nor even a guidebook to show us the way. With nowhere to go, we waited on the plane and were the last to disembark. We needed time to acclimate. I watched as the other passengers, for whom patience was no virtue, leapt from their seats and filled the aisles. Their clothes, like ours, were stained with sweat and wrinkled from too many hours in coach. The line of bodies rushed the exit door where, by twos and threes, they slipped into the darkness. A steward hovered over our row and asked if we needed help with our luggage. In other words, it was time to go. We strapped our backpacks to our shoulders, stepped through the door, and climbed down a set of stairs into the deep night.

A shuttle bus carried us, and the flight crew, across the tarmac and dumped us outside the doors of a cheerless terminal. The building was several years past its expiry date. Its tile floor was a dingy, mud hue, and the lights flickered and popped. Faded signs pointed the way toward an arrival hall. The signs, composed in Arabic, French, or English, were lettered by hand, some decades ago, and seemingly without the aid of a dictionary. A crowd of men – and only men – swarmed a row of windows along the far wall. Each window was signed with an unfamiliar name like Banque du Caire, Banque Misr, and so on. Behind each window sat young men in collared, button-up shirts. They exchanged currencies and sold visas (cash only) to ill-prepared travelers like us. For some years, the price had been fifteen dollars for a thirty-day visa, but the signs were recently amended, by hand: $25. “Someone has to pay for the revolution,” I joked, but nobody heard. With visas in hand, we made our way to the receiving hall and stood in a short line to cross through passport control.

“You have to peel off the sticker. They won’t do it for you.” A man in line behind us held out his passport. He was short, squat, and very well dressed. By his accent, I guessed he were British. “Like this,” he said while pointing to a page in his passport. “You have to peel off the visa and put it on a blank page in your passport. If you’re not ready when you get up there they’ll send you back to the end of the line.” The helpful Brit seemed not to realize that he was, in fact, the end of the line.

“I guess you’ve done this before,” I said.

He flipped through his passport – its red cover and coat of arms matched his accent – and showed pages of Egyptian visas. He traveled to Cairo every other week for business and had for years, he said. On his advice, Teresa and I tried, in vain, to peel the backing from our visa stickers. Suddenly, it was our turn to enter passport control.

“Passports.” The agent stared through us.

We handed our passports and visas to him. Teresa bit her lip and shrugged, but the agent shook his head. With a flick of his wrist, he peeled off the stickers and placed one in each of our passports. Then he winked. Teresa says he didn’t, but I know he did.

“How long will you stay?”

“Thirty days.”

“Purpose of your visit?”

“Tourism.”

“Welcome to Egypt.”

We passed through a gate to a large concourse illuminated by an odd, yellow fluorescence. The concourse was crowded with men, women, and children. They pushed and shoved and reluctantly hugged each other as if they had assembled for the world’s most awkward family reunion. Teresa desperately wanted a loo, but if there were one, we couldn’t see it. I just wanted to go outside. Teresa clutched my backpack and trailed me through the crowd, across the concourse, and to the curb. The sky was black with night and brown with smog. Warm air, exhaust, and cigarette smoke burned my eyes. I looked around and saw dozens of men: some stood, others sat, and a few more paced in front of the terminal. I looked to the parking lot and saw dozens more men. Most of the men leaned against their cars and smoked. Others stood in circles and smoked and joked and laughed.

“Let’s get a room,” Teresa said. “I don’t care where. I just don’t want to be here.”

“You don’t want to be here at the airport, or you don’t want to be here in Egypt?” Teresa didn’t answer. “There’s a hotel at the airport,” I said. “I think it’s the Meridien, or something like that.”

“OK, I don’t care, can we go?”

Airports rarely make good first impressions, and the arrival hall at Cairo International was particularly unwelcoming that night. Teresa already hated Egypt, and I doubted she would enjoy thirty days touring the country any more than she had enjoyed thirty minutes in the terminal. But it was too late. We were in Cairo and had nowhere else to go. If nothing else, we should see the pyramids, I figured. I had read about a grand hotel, a budget buster, near the pyramids. We could stay there for the night, see the pyramids, and leave the next day, if Teresa wanted.

“Let’s go to Giza,” I said. “Mena House. It’s near the pyramids. Let’s go there for the night.”

I looked across the parking lot and noticed an older fellow leaning on the roof of a tired, four-door sedan. Like most of the men around us, he wore a long, white robe – the djellaba – and smoked a cigarette. I liked his demeanor. He was quiet and kept to himself, until he caught me glancing at him.

“Tax!” he shouted as he leapt for our bags.

“Hello. We are going to Mena House in Giza.” I spoke slowly and hoped for the best.

“Mean Hows?” The driver stared at me and repeated my words.

“Yes, Mena House, in Giza.”

“Al Ahram?” the driver asked.

My mouth opened, but no words came out. Al Ahram is Arabic for the pyramids, but I couldn’t know that. I took a chance anyway. “Al Haram,” I said. The butchered words flowed like marbles from my lips, but, rather than dwell on minor details, like our destination, I asked how much. Mena House is about twenty-five miles from the airport, and the ride would take about an hour.

“Fifty?” the driver asked.

“Ten?” I suggested.

“Twenty-five?”

“Twenty?”

“Twenty,” the driver agreed with a sigh.

Teresa and I squeezed into the back seat with our bags lodged across our laps. Our driver didn’t wait for us to get comfortable. He shifted gears, hit the gas, and drove toward a crowd of men who loitered in the parking lot. Those fearless souls barely moved as our driver weaved through their huddled masses. On the far side of the parking lot, the driver stopped suddenly near a shack by the gate. He honked the horn a few times – no answer. He honked again. A police officer, dressed in a crisp, white uniform, stepped outside. He inspected the taxi, the driver, and us. When he was satisfied, of what I can’t say, he leaned through the passenger window and exchanged a few words with the driver. The only thing I understood was Mena House, and those words sounded better by the minute. The officer asked for our passports, scribbled some words on a sheet of paper, and handed his clipboard to me. The clipboard held a single sheet of paper filled top to bottom with a long list of names and destinations, few of which I could read or understand. At the bottom of the list, the officer had printed our names and the name of the hotel in neat block letters. I scribbled my initials on the form and wondered whether anyone would ever compare those signatures against some master list of foreigners and visas and hotels. I didn’t have time to ask.

Our driver accelerated quickly, drove around a pair of speed bumps, and slammed on the brakes near a booth on the side of the road. Our driver turned to me and said something in Arabic. I stared back at him. He repeated himself. I stared back at him even harder. Frustrated with my stupidity, he drove up to the booth and paid a fee: thirty-five Egyptian pounds. A long moment later, I realized that it was a tollbooth, and we, not our driver, were supposed to pay the toll. I fumbled through my wallet, found a crumpled five-dollar note, and handed it to him. He held the note in the air, inspected it, and shoved it in his pocket. “Shokrun,” he said.

As we pulled away from the airport, I looked at Teresa. She had traveled to Turkey and Morocco some years ago, and she knew the routine: dress and act with modesty. But Teresa worried that Egypt would be different. She worried that Egypt would be more conservative or more dangerous for women than it had been in recent years. For decades, Egypt catered to the whims of European powers and society, and the country was a liberal playground for tourists and expats. Bars, pool halls, and prostitutes lined the streets from Alexandria to Cairo – and they were busy. That changed after the revolution in 1952. Egypt shifted toward Islamism and its concomitant social conservatism. Even then, Egypt advocated a moderate brand of theocracy, at least compared to other Arab states. Then came the revolution in 2011. The next year, Egypt held its first-ever democratic election, and Mohammed Morsi, an Islamist reformer, won the presidency. His victory threatened women’s rights in Egypt. A year later, a military coup ousted Morsi and his backers, the Muslim Brotherhood. Since then, there have been numerous terrorist strikes in Egypt. Police and military forces are the most frequent targets, but terrorists have also attacked planes, buses, and hotels. The battle over Egypt’s ideology continues. Teresa was right: Egypt would be different.

Our driver veered onto the highway and sped into the night. The sky was dark and smoggy. Streetlamps cast a faded glow on the pavement. Pedestrians gathered on the highway shoulder. They darted between lanes of traffic, and I wished them all Godspeed. In the middle lane, directly ahead of us, a tiny pick-up truck struggled under the weight of its load. Its bed was overloaded with flattened cardboard. The leaning tower of boxes climbed eight feet from the bed, and the heap was fastened, just barely, to the truck by loops of twine. A young man sat on top of the load. He smoked a cigarette with one hand, and held on to the twine with the other. I reached for my camera – no one would ever believe this – but our driver tore past the pick-up truck at full speed. Honk! The truck, its load, and its improbable passenger disappeared in a cloud of exhaust.

After some miles, we left the highway and merged onto a surface street. The highway had terrified me, but the surface streets were worse. Cars, trucks, buses, scooters, and pedestrians swarmed the roads like locusts. There were no traffic signals, no signs, and no police to guide the masses. Testosterone determined right-of-way: those with the biggest balls went first, and our driver seemingly had the biggest balls of them all. I simultaneously feared and respected his madness.

The road continued for miles through canyons of apartment blocks and through knotted intersections of frenzied traffic. Somewhere along the way, we crossed a bridge, and our driver shouted back to us, “Nile River.” We crossed the river into Giza, the world’s second largest suburb. The city never ended, and the traffic never ceased. By then it was three o’clock in the morning, but the city was wide awake. Men, women, and children shopped, ate, smoked, and walked through traffic. Bright lights and signs decorated the storefronts like a linear Times Square. I recognized some of the names like Pizza Hut, Kentucky Fried Chicken, and Dominos. We had traveled halfway around the world only to find America’s worst chain restaurants.

Our driver took a sharp left, over a median strip, and nosed the taxi into oncoming traffic. He flashed his lights a few times and tapped on the horn. Beep, beep, beep. He gunned the motor and we shot across several lanes of cars and trucks and buses and scooters. Their drivers blared their horns and flashed their headlights, but none of them slowed for a moment. Certain that we were about to die, I reached over and squeezed Teresa’s hand, but she hadn’t noticed our near-death experience at all. Instead, she stared through the window and up toward the heavens. I followed her gaze and found something far more interesting than the imminent threat of death by taxi. There was an odd glow on the horizon. It looked a bit like an eclipse – just an orange corona around a silhouette of nothingness. Our driver shouted, “Pyramid!”

The road twisted and turned around a few bends. The pedestrians, horse-drawn carts, cars, scooters, and trucks slipped away till we had the road to ourselves. The taxi coasted to a stop, and our driver rolled down his window and waited. Teresa and I looked at each other. Where are we? I don’t know. My eyes dilated in the low light, and I realized we were outside Mena House. A guardhouse stood to one side of the driveway, and a massive swing gate blocked our path. We were otherwise surrounded by darkness and silence. It was the first moment of peace we had enjoyed since we woke up in Lisbon the previous morning, but our tranquility was short-lived. A row of floodlights erupted in our eyes, and several armed guards surrounded our car. Two of the guards carried rifles on their shoulders, and a third led a large dog on a short leash. One guard interrogated our driver. Another guard pointed his flashlight into the car and inspected our faces, while yet another guard circled the taxi. He carried a long pole with a round mirror at one end. He poked the mirror under the taxi and scanned the undercarriage for explosives while our driver popped the trunk for inspection. Suddenly, the gate swung open.

The open gate revealed a towering porte cochère decorated with flowers, none of which we recognized, and dark green hedges, each trimmed to perfection. A magnificent chandelier cast its rays over the driveway and a marble staircase that led up to the lobby. Soft music whispered to us from speakers hidden overhead. The courtyard was beautiful, like a country estate in Victorian England. On any other day, we might have spent an hour admiring the flora and architecture, but our driver was in a hurry. He helped Teresa with her bag and wiped the windshield with a rag while he waited for me to pay him. I wanted to hurry, but couldn’t. My extremities were numb from the cramped quarters and bumpy ride. I struggled with the door handle and pried myself from the seat, out the door, and onto the pavement. After a few uneasy steps, I wobbled over to our driver and counted off twenty-five dollars – enough for the ride and a fair tip, or so I thought.

He refused my money. “No,” he said as he pushed my hand away. The poor fellow lectured me for several minutes, about what I can only imagine. His complaint was all for naught – our mutual language barrier prevented us from enjoying any degree of civil discourse. I held out the money again. Our driver cursed me, took the money, jumped in his taxi, and sped into the darkness. Only then did I realize that, during our negotiations, we had agreed on a denomination, but not a currency. He must have expected from me British pound or even euro, not the less valuable but almighty dollar.

A porter met us in the driveway. “Good evening. Welcome to Mena House. Do you have a reservation?”

I opened my mouth but stumbled for a reply. Had we traveled all this way only to be turned away like Mary and Joseph in Bethlehem? I knew of a few other hotels in the area, but I dreaded the thought of another taxi ride that night. I shook my head and waited for the bad news. Instead, the porter smiled, led us up the stairs and through a revolving, wooden door. The lobby was charming but dark and quiet. A clerk stood behind the desk and smiled at us. I just stood there, next to the porter, with my backpack strapped over my sweaty shoulders, and marveled at the room around me. The dark woods and marbled floors suggested wealth and luxury. The cool air filled my lungs and calmed my nerves. I didn’t even notice that Teresa had left my side. She found a huge, leather chair on the far side of the lobby and curled up for a nap.

“Hello. Welcome. Do you have a reservation?” the clerk asked.

“No,” I said. I thought about the way were dressed, and I thought about our harried taxi ride, and I thought about our squabble with the driver in front of the hotel. I wondered whether the hotel would even accept a pair of budget travelers without reservations. I concocted a fib to cover the truth of our unannounced arrival. “I tried to make reservations on-line, but your website crashed.”

The clerk grimaced and asked me to wait while he made a phone call. I had insulted his website, and by extension, him and the hotel itself. He might be on the phone to the Internet police right now, I imagined. They’ll see through my story and send us on our way.

A young man peeked around the corner. He wore a suit of fine, dark linen, and his hair was trimmed and pasted with perfection. He looked at the clerk, and the clerk nodded in my direction. I readied myself for inspection. I brushed off my clothes and stood at attention.

“I understand you had trouble with our website. It is no problem, we have room for you. How many nights?”

Teresa had nodded off in her chair. We would work out the details – like cost – later.

“Yes, thank you, two nights please,” I said.

A waiter suddenly appeared by my side. He held a tray with two glasses of karkadé, a dark red, hibiscus tea. I thanked him for the drinks and offered one to Teresa. She opened her eyes and smiled. While she savored her drink with feminine sips, I swallowed mine in a greedy masculine gulp. The tea was bitter, like cranberry juice, but cold and refreshing. It was also the first food or drink we had consumed in hours.

We weren’t used to the level of luxury that the hotel offered, and I’m not sure they knew what to make of us either. After the clerk finished recording the details from our passports, a bellhop led us to the driveway where we met a porter. The porter desperately wanted to help us with our luggage, but we resisted his offer for fear of misplacing the sum total of our earthly possessions. The porter just smiled and led us to a golf cart parked under the porte cochère. Our seats faced backward, and we loaded our backpacks across our laps. The porter threw the cart in high gear, and we sped across the compound to a distant wing of the hotel. We traveled down a long concrete driveway past palm trees and sweet-smelling lawns. The compound was much larger than I expected, and it took several minutes to cross. When we reached the far side, the porter parked the cart and rushed up the stairs to open the door for us. A uniformed guard sat next to a small card table and a metal detector, but the porter walked around the checkpoint and so did we. We traveled up one flight and down a wide and brightly-lit corridor decorated with fine art and decked with spotless, white marble tile. The porter unlocked the door to our room and waved us inside.

The room was bigger, and better furnished, than our apartment back in Boston. The mattress was equal parts firm and soft. Four massive pillows and cool, white, cotton sheets adorned the bed. The room included a full-size couch, desk, coffee table, and flat-screen television. The bathroom had a large, walk-in shower and marble countertops. A glass wall with French doors opened to a private patio decked with lounge chairs and a table. From the patio, we could see palm trees and grass, but not much else. The sky was black. There were no stars or lights as far as we could see.

The porter pointed to the darkness. “Pyramid,” he said. “Will you need anything else?”

“No, thank you,” I said. I found a British two-pound coin in my pocket. It was a lousy tip in every way, but I was exhausted.

The porter smiled. “Thank you. Welcome to Egypt.”



⁂



Teresa woke first that morning, just a few hours later. She tiptoed across the marble floor in her bare feet, opened the curtains, and let the morning sun sweep over the room. She made a cup of coffee and sat on the patio while I piled pillows over my eyes. I wanted more sleep, but Teresa was too excited.

“Look,” she said, “there’s a pyramid outside!”

“It’s probably the same pyramid we saw last night,” I replied.

“Which one is it? What’s it called?”

“I don’t remember. They all look the same from here. Would you please close the curtains?”

Teresa had already showered and dressed, and she teased me for being slow. “Don’t be idle,” she said. “We need to change our money, and I want to find a guidebook. I wonder if there’s a travel agency in the hotel; maybe they can book a tour for us.”

“Five more minutes,” I said. I tucked my head between two pillows while Teresa waltzed around the room. The sound of her feet on the tile floor rang in my ears. I was annoyed with her for being so happy when I wanted to be grumpy. Had we not shared the same flight, the same taxi ride, the same noise and congestion and smog? I wondered why she were even awake. A few hours earlier – at the airport, in the taxi – I thought Teresa would hate Egypt, and I thought she would hate me for bringing her there. A cold cup of hibiscus tea and a few hours sleep in a luxurious bed cured her of all worries.

“Don’t forget, breakfast is included,” she added.

The breakfast buffet was in the dining hall, and the dining hall was in the main building, where we had checked in earlier that morning. At this point I should inform you, dear reader, that the Egyptian sun is superior, in every way, to the sun we have back home, in Boston. The Egyptian sun is larger, hotter, stronger, and meaner than anything we had ever experienced, anywhere, ever, and we were not ready for our hike across the compound that morning. We tucked our hats down to our eyebrows and pushed our sunglasses against our faces till we lost all feeling in our cheeks. Still, the sun felt no shame. The palm trees offered little shade and no relief. Teresa suggested we buy sunscreen, immediately. I noticed a golf cart off in the distance and wondered whether it were the same porter we had met that morning. I wondered whether he would pick us up in his golf cart. I wondered whether he would carry our feeble souls to breakfast. It would have been easier than the long haul across the compound. The golf cart drew closer and closer, and I waved hello. The driver waved and smiled but never stopped.

“Was that the porter we met this morning?” I asked.

“I think so.”

“Maybe he didn’t remember us.”

“Or maybe he did.”

“That was a lousy tip, wasn’t it?”

Teresa agreed. “Yes, it was.”

We must have been late to breakfast that morning; the dining room was empty. I counted three other couples in a room large enough to seat several hundred. The hostess seated us at a small table next to a window with a clear view of the pyramids. We ordered coffee for Teresa and water for me then explored the buffet. The food looked familiar, but with a local twist. I passed a large tray of bacon (beef) and sausages (beef) and roasted potatoes (not beef, but soaked in beef gravy). At the next station, a chef cheerily offered to prepare eggs in any manner of ways. At another table, I found something I didn’t recognize at all: fuul medames. Fuul is a traditional Egyptian dish of mashed and spiced fava beans, and it’s extremely popular in Egypt. At best, the dish looks a lot like refried beans. At worst, the dish looks a lot like, well, nothing I wanted to eat. I moved on, my plate empty, past a table filled with sliced fruits (I never trust sliced fruit in a buffet) and loaves of bread in every shape, size, and style. The next table offered chilled yoghurts and dry cereals. Still, my plate was empty. I bumped into Teresa. She had filled her plate with something from every station, except the fuul. Faced with too many choices in unfamiliar varieties, in the end, I settled on a couple pastries and a square of cheese.

Over breakfast, we debated whether to explore the pyramids that day, or laze about the hotel. “They’re right here,” Teresa said of the pyramids. “But the hotel is right here,” I said of Mena House. With the vote tied, we adopted a laissez–faire attitude.

After breakfast, we investigated the rest of the main building. The front desk buzzed with clerks and patrons and porters. Racks of luggage passed from elevator to lobby to waiting cars. The luggage bore brand names like Gucci and Louis Vuitton. The cars bore luxury nameplates like Mercedes and BMW. I surveyed the crowd but found no haggard faces with backpacks. I scanned the driveway and found no outdated taxis. The staff, drivers, and clientele were all dressed for a GQ fashion shoot. I wondered whether anyone could see the patch on my jeans. Teresa wondered why the hotel needed so many armed guards. They made her nervous, she said. They have them so they don’t need them, I reasoned.

We strolled past the front desk and down a dark corridor where we found souvenir shops, a bank, and a travel agency. We shook a few door handles and peeked though a few dark windows.

“They’ll be closed now,” a clerk called out to us. “Come back at ten o’clock, please.”

That was the best news I had ever heard. Teresa didn’t know, but I secretly hoped to sleep away the morning. My breakfast disagreed – quite strongly – with my stomach, and my head hurt from the dry air. Teresa could not be swayed. “Let’s look around the hotel,” she said.

Mena House is a sprawling resort with hundreds of rooms and suites, forty acres of manicured lawn, strings of towering palm trees, lush gardens, a golf course, and several fine restaurants. Of course, the amenities are but icing on the cake of antiquity, and the star attraction here is the pyramid complex that fills the plateau right next door. If not for the pyramids, there would be no Mena House. In fact, if not for the pyramids, the plateau would be nothing more than bedrock and sand. But the pyramids are there, and they have been for forty-five centuries. In that time, the pyramids have attracted millions of visitors but few permanent residents, until the nineteenth century. Egypt was then a vassal state controlled by the Ottoman Empire, but ruled locally by Isma’il Pasha. In 1869, Isma’il commissioned a two-story hunting lodge to be built on a hill, just a few hundred yards from the pyramids. The site, which, in case you had not yet guessed, is now Mena House, guaranteed a great view. It also guaranteed privacy. In those days, Giza was more farm than town, and Cairo, eight miles to the east of the plateau, was a hard day’s ride away. Would-be visitors would have to cross the Nile, mind the crocodiles, march through the floodplains and fields, and climb cliffs and sand dunes to reach the pyramids and the new hunting lodge. There were no roads, no truck stops, nor any services along the way. That would soon change.

Isma’il was exiled in 1879, and, four years later, he sold his hunting lodge to Frederick and Jessie Head, a British couple who happened upon the lodge on their honeymoon (right about the same time that Isma’il was deposed). The Heads expanded the lodge and named it Mena House, in honor of Menes, the famed, if not apocryphal, pharaoh who united Upper and Lower Egypt. Two years later, the Heads sold the lodge to the Locke Kings, another British family, who then converted the lodge to a hotel. By then, Britain and France had effectively colonized Egypt, and, thanks to the advent of mass tourism spawned by Thomas Cook, a new generation of Europeans marched across the country, not with cannons, but with cameras. The pyramids were a highlight of any tour, and Mena House was the obvious lodging choice for elite travelers. The hotel offered all the trappings of upper-class, British leisure, but with warmer weather. Those trappings included stables, croquet, tennis, a royal fireplace (a very unusual feature in Egypt), and a swimming pool (reportedly the first in Egypt). Electricity was installed throughout the hotel sometime around 1900, and trams, trains, and horse-drawn coaches made daily trips from Cairo. Mena House was then fit for a king, but poor Isma’il died in 1895. He never saw what became of his beloved hunting lodge.

“How do you find the hotel?” a porter asked.

“Very nice,” we answered in unison.

The porter insisted we tour the hotel’s eldest wing. He led us down a corridor to a door on the far end. Two brass signs adorned the frame, one on either side of the door. One sign was engraved in Arabic, the other in an ornate, but unusual English script: CHurchill SUite. It was there, during the Second World War, that Winston Churchill stayed during the Cairo Conference, the porter informed us. (He didn’t mention where Roosevelt or Chiang Kai-shek stayed.) We followed the porter into the suite, through a sitting room and dining room, and we stuck our noses in not one, but two, bathrooms – they were oddly small and dated, I thought. The porter mentioned that Churchill preferred one bathroom to the other, but we didn’t think to ask why. Lastly, we entered the bedroom. The walls were decorated with carved panels of heavy dark wood. French doors looked over the gardens and out to the pyramids. The carpet was bright green, and the room was furnished with a king-sized bed, extra-wide lounge chairs, and a sofa. The wall behind the bed was adorned with an ornate, round panel, ten-feet across. Its surface was painted gold and carved with geometric patterns that reminded me, vaguely, of a rising sun.

“How much does this room cost?” Teresa asked.

“Fifteen hundred dollars a night,” the porter answered. “Plus tax.”

“Does that include breakfast?” I asked, and we all laughed.

After our tour of the Churchill Suite, we stopped to admire the woodwork on the terrace above the lobby. I especially enjoyed the arched entranceway between the staircase and the suite. A second porter offered to give us a tour. We declined his offer, but I asked about the arch.

“Is this design drawn from classical Egypt or does it represent Arab influence?” I asked.

The porter politely considered my question. “It’s a door,” he said.

(In fact, the entranceway was a pointed Moorish horseshoe arch drawn from medieval Iberian architecture, but none of us knew that.)

We stepped outside and followed a staircase up a gentle slope, behind the hotel, to the garden under the Churchill Suite. We inspected the flowerbeds and took deep breaths. The smell of fresh-cut grass filled our noses. Teresa posed for a few photos with the pyramids as her backdrop. A gardener stopped to enjoy our photo shoot. He waved and smiled then leaned over and returned to work. We crossed the garden, toward a thick row of hedges that stood between us and the road that led up to the pyramids. From that vantage point, about five or six feet above street level, we could see most of the pyramid complex including the ticket booths, security checkpoints, crowds, camels, and horse-drawn carriages that mingled around the plateau. I leaned over the hedges to take more photos of the pyramids.

“Hello. Where are you from?”

I hadn’t noticed the fellow standing on the sidewalk below the hedges. He wore a red baseball cap, a striped, button-up shirt, blue jeans, and sneakers. He was in his early twenties, average height and stocky, but what I really noticed was his five o’clock shadow and bright smile. Although I had never met him, I recognized him right away. He was a hustler. In Egypt, they call themselves guides or touts, but they’re all hustlers.

“Hi,” I answered. I turned my camera to the pyramids and snapped a few more frames. The walls and hedges of Mena House segregated me from the hustler, but that didn’t stop him from trying.

“Yes. Hello. What is your name? Where are you from?”

“Germany,” I said with my best Colonel Klink accent. Of course, I’m not from Germany, but the hustler didn’t care. He didn’t want to know my name or my troubles. To him I was nothing more than an ATM. I don’t mind the hustle, I really don’t. I usually play along for awhile and go on my way.

“Germany?” the hustler asked. “Guten Tag. Wie heißen Sie?”

The hustler would not be outdone by my ploy, so I improvised a new escape.

“No, I said my name is Jeremy. I’m from Canada.”

“Yes. Hello. Welcome to Egypt. Is this your first time here?”

Our lopsided conversation dragged on while I politely, but curtly, shook off every pitch the hapless salesman could make. Camel ride? No. Donkey ride? No. Carriage ride? No. You know how much? No. Maybe tomorrow? No. The hustler smiled like a proud father, or like a happy idiot, or both. And he complimented me with every pitch. You look Egyptian. Thank you? You look strong, like a horse. Thank you? He liked my camera, he liked my hat, and he liked my jeans. He liked everything about me, and he wanted to be my friend. I didn’t mean to laugh, but I did.

Teresa tugged on my elbow and told me it was time to go. On our way back to the lobby she asked about the man on the other side of the hedge.

“Oh, he wanted us to go for a ride or something,” I answered.

“What’d you say?”

“No, thanks.”

“You were talking a long time. Why didn’t you just walk away?”

“I don’t know. He seemed nice,” I said.

Back in the lobby, the desk clerk waved. “The shops are open.”

We poked around a souvenir shop, but didn’t buy anything. We wanted a guidebook but didn’t like the titles they carried. We asked the travel agency for a list of tours but didn’t take any. We wanted a tour of the pyramids, but none of their tours fit our budget. We went to the bank to convert our currency.

“I’d like to exchange some euro please,” I said.

“Exchange them for what?” the clerk asked.

“Pound, please. Egyptian pound.”

The clerk, a middle-aged man dressed in a crisp, button-up shirt, asked for my passport and counted the euro. He consulted an oversized desk calculator, applied the official exchange rate, and handed the notes to a second clerk for verification. The second clerk, another middle-aged fellow dressed in an equally crisp, button-up shirt, counted the euro notes and deposited them into a lockbox. He opened a different lockbox, withdrew a thick wad of pound notes, and counted those notes. Small denomination notes and coins are rare in Egypt, so the clerk rounded the number to the nearest five-pound increment. Then he then handed that wad of cash to the first clerk, and the first clerk counted the pound notes, and signed some paperwork. The first clerk then counted the money back to me. Everything seemed right, but as a show of solidarity, I counted the notes back to the clerk. He just shook his head.

We returned to our room, showered again, and rested. I tried to find an Internet connection, but the Wi-Fi signal eluded my computer. Teresa wanted to tour the pyramids that afternoon. She suggested we hire a guide at the travel agency after all, but I resisted. “We should go tomorrow,” I said. By then my stomach churned in fits and starts; and the hot, dry air triggered my asthma. I hadn’t had an attack in years, and I didn’t bring an inhaler. I needed to rest, but Teresa would not have it. She paced across the room, tore open the patio doors, and pointed to the horizon. I should have confessed my ailments, but I couldn’t disappoint her again, not after Lisbon. Instead, I swallowed a handful of antacids and aspirin and washed them down with a glass of lukewarm tap water. “OK,” I said, “let’s go see the pyramids.”





The Pyramid Hustle





I first learned about Egypt and the pyramids in the third grade. We were seated at our desks, ready for the day’s lessons, when our teacher opened the classroom door. She had a cart loaded with a record player, a box of filmstrips, and a projector. Our teacher announced that we would have a special presentation that day, and we erupted with a cheer. It was a familiar routine: one student closed the door, another shut off the lights, and I lowered a screen over the chalkboard. Our teacher plugged in the projector and record player. She inserted the first filmstrip and aligned the notches just right. She loaded an album onto the record player and lowered the needle. The record player crackled and music erupted from the tinny speakers. Trumpets and beating drums flowed across the room, and a narrator welcomed us to the show. The screen burst to life with a title card. History of Egypt, it might have read. The narrator announced that we were headed to the land of pharaohs and pyramids and the Nile River. Beep. The teacher clicked a button and the filmstrip advanced. For the next twenty minutes, we watched as static images filled the screen and the narrator’s authoritative voice described ancient Egypt. “The Nile River is the longest river in the world.” Beep. “The ancient pyramids are the last of the Seven Wonders of the World.” Beep. The slides alternated between black and white photos taken during the early twentieth century and artists’ renderings of what life was like in the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms. “The pyramids once gleamed in brilliant marble overlooking the wide blue waters of the Nile River.” Beep. “Tree-lined avenues connected the pyramids to the Sphinx, and crocodiles lounged in the sun.” Beep. Wood blocks imitated the sound of horses and camels marching across the desert. I don’t actually remember much of what the narrator said, but I was mesmerized and hoped that one day I would visit the pyramids.



⁂



“Jeremy!”

My name isn’t Jeremy, so it took me a minute to realize that someone was speaking to me. It was the hustler I had met earlier, on our tour of the gardens at Mena House. I had forgotten about him, but he remembered me.

“You go to the pyramids now? You want a carriage ride? You know how much? I give you good price.”

“No, we’re just going for a walk.” My excuse failed on every level. We were two travelers, in Egypt, on a road that led nowhere but the pyramids. Of course we were going to see the pyramids, but I couldn’t admit that to the hustler.

“The pyramids are very big, you will get lost,” he said. “No one ever goes there without a guide. I am very good. I speak English, and I know all the pyramids. You know how many pyramids there are? Nine. It’s true.”

It is true. The pyramid complex encompasses nine pyramids (three large, and six smaller), the Great Sphinx, tombs, temples, boat pits, causeways, cemeteries, and a workers’ village, among other ancient features. Modern features include paved roads, a handful of signs, uniformed guards, and a whole lot of touts. The touts congregate along the road that leads from Mena House to the security gate. They sit on the wall that encircles the pyramid complex, they lean on the cars, and they squat on the ground. Other touts sit in the shade of the security checkpoint and the ticket booths. Still others roam the plateau. We needed a guide just to keep the other guides at bay.

“How much?” I asked the hustler.

“Jeremy, I am honest man. I will show you the pyramids and the Sphinx. Then I take you to the papyrus museum,” he said.

“OK, but how much?”

“No, my friend. This is not about money. I am a poor boy from Giza,” he said while pointing toward the apartment blocks below the plateau. “This is my home. I live here. Since I was baby, I climb on the pyramids and I know every inch like you know your hand. If you like me after you can give me money, is your choice.”

“OK, but how much?”

“Whatever you like. All I ask is that you don’t kill me twice.” The hustler clenched his hand, like he was grasping a knife, and swiped an X across his abdomen.

“OK, fine,” I surrendered to his plea. “What’s your name?”

“My name is Sayid.”

We followed Sayid through the security gate and climbed up a dusty field toward the pyramids. Sayid pointed to the ticket booth and said he would meet us on the far side of the security checkpoint. He kept us on a long leash, close enough to watch, but no closer. At first, I enjoyed Sayid’s charade. He presented himself as the friendly stranger, but really he was a caricature of all back-alley hustlers. We followed his instructions nonetheless. We bought our tickets, cleared security, and found Sayid, as promised, waiting for us outside. (A gang of touts took refuge in the shade behind the security checkpoint, but they ignored us – it’s the hustler’s code.) Beyond the security checkpoint, the pyramid complex spread south and west across the plateau. The scene bore little resemblance to the old photos and illustrations we studied in school. Up close, the pyramids are larger and more decrepit than I expected, and there were numerous other features (like the boat pits and minor pyramids) that barely register in most accounts. The sand dunes that once covered the area were cleared away in the last century, and thousands of tourists and vendors mob the plateau on most days. The necropolis, I quickly realized, is part museum, part circus, right down to the nightly light shows, and for the next couple hours, Sayid would be our ringmaster.

“Stand here, up here,” Sayid said as he led Teresa to a large boulder. “Jeremy, stand here.” He instructed Teresa to point a certain way and hold her fingers in a certain manner. Then he directed me to frame the shot: left, right, up, down, back, and forward until I finally realized what Sayid hoped to achieve. There was Teresa, standing on a boulder, and, through a carefully crafted optical illusion, her hand touched the top of a pyramid behind her. It was the quintessential touristy shot, and I knew Teresa would love it. Sayid directed us to switch places, but I declined. “I’m too ugly. My photo would shatter the camera,” I said. Sayid laughed and slapped his belly.

Sayid marched on, and led us to the remnants of an ancient, stone enclosure wall, about ten feet high and thirty feet long. He stopped in front of a narrow doorway secured with a heavy gate of iron bars. We peered through the gate into a dark room set into the old wall. The room was decorated with murals and bas-relief engravings. They were worn and difficult to see, but Sayid described, in his own way, the images and their meaning. “Seven thousand years ago, people say you die, you come back.” He held his hand to his chest, waved it slowly away, and then back again.

“Do you mean reincarnation?” I asked.

Sayid avoided my question. “Seven thousand years ago, people say you die, you come back,” he repeated. I thought back to my college lectures. I wondered whether Sayid meant to illustrate ka and ba, ambulatory elements of what we might call the soul. I knew better than to ask any more questions.

Sayid was already bored of his own tour. He marched away from us, slowly, but with great purpose. He led us to the Great Pyramid. Commissioned by Khufu, a pharaoh from the fourth dynasty, during the Old Kingdom, the Great Pyramid is the largest and oldest pyramid at Giza. It is surrounded by stanchions and heavy, steel chain, but those minor details didn’t bother Sayid. He climbed over the chain and waved for us to follow him.

Teresa hesitated. “We can’t go over there,” she complained.

“I’m sure it’s fine,” I said with a wink. “Sayid said so.”

Sayid smiled. “Go ahead, climb the pyramids, but don’t go too high or you will get lost.”

The temptation was too great for Teresa to ignore. Though she was reluctant to hop the fencing, just a minute earlier, she could not resist climbing the pyramid. The stones, which were several feet high, were worn smooth. Her hands struggled to find grips, and her feet struggled to find traction, but after a long minute she had ascended the first two courses of stone. She surveyed the plateau for a minute then declared herself king of the mountain while I snapped a few frames for posterity. Sayid just leaned against the pyramid and kicked the dust off his sneakers.

“Sayid, have you ever climbed the pyramid?” I asked.

He laughed. “When I was a boy, we climbed every pyramid, all the way up. To me, boring, I live right there.” He pointed down the hill, at a thick mass of apartment blocks that hug the necropolis, then he abruptly resumed his lecture. “Seven thousand years ago, people say you die, you come back.” That was the extent of Sayid’s archaeological interest in the pyramids. I asked him about the open pits and small tombs that we passed on our tour of the plateau. Sayid cocked his head, but didn’t answer. I asked, jokingly, whether he thought aliens built the pyramids. He shook his head and waved his finger at me. “Tsk, tsk,” he said.

We followed Sayid to the next pyramid, Khafre, just a few hundred feet away, but Teresa dawdled and fell behind. When I turned around to find her, she was walking next to a tall, slender man. His djellaba was yellowed and frayed and fluttered in the breeze. He led a horse with one hand and handed something to Teresa with the other. I jogged back to Teresa, and Sayid followed closely at my side.

Horse Man panicked and rushed to intercept me. “My friend! Welcome!” His grin revealed a partial set of yellow, cracked, and misaligned teeth. His leathered cheeks stretched thin across his jaws. “You look Egyptian, my friend!”

Sayid, as always, stood off to the side. He seemed impatient, but did not speak at all. I asked Teresa what Horse Man gave her, and she extended her hand to reveal two old, plastic beads. Horse Man snatched the beads from Teresa’s palm and handed them to me.

“A gift, my friend,” Horse Man pleaded with me. The gift, as it were, was a talisman, a symbol of amity meant to court friendship with Teresa, then me. The beads, of course, were worthless, and he probably found them in one of the trash heaps that dot the city. But, in economic theory, gifts bear the weight of reciprocity, and they must be returned, not equally, but equitably. I know the game, but I didn’t want to play. Instead, I returned the beads to Horse Man. “My friend, is this your first time in Egypt?” Horse Man looked at me, then turned to Teresa. “Is this your wife? She is lovely. Where are you from?”

“Giza,” I answered quickly.

Horse Man laughed. “Me, too, my friend. We must be brothers.” He handed his horse’s reins to me and asked me to mount the poor beast. “Just put your foot here, in the stirrup. You look Egyptian, my friend.”

I wanted to like Horse Man. I wanted to respect him and his lifestyle, and, if not for what he did next, I might have thanked him the traditional way (with a cash tip called baksheesh). But Horse Man went too far, and what he did next was unthinkable. He unraveled his turban and wrapped it around my head. I froze with anger and disgust. His body odor was unthinkably sour, and his hands reeked of horseshit. Worse yet, he had violated my personal space in a way that few others ever have. I bit my cheek. Adrenaline rushed to my legs and arms. Teresa stepped back. She thought I might kill Horse Man. Sayid turned around. He didn’t want to see what might happen next.

My face turned red. I dropped the reins and puffed out my chest. Then I leaned forward and let the filthy turban slip off my head and fall to the ground.

“Please, my good friend, where from? England? America?” Horse Man didn’t care where I was from. He wanted to know what brand of currency I carried in my pocket. He extended his hand. “Please my friend, say thank you from your heart.”

I should have walked away, but I didn’t. Instead, I reached into my pocket and found two Egyptian, one-pound coins. Together, they were worth about twenty-eight cents, and I hoped the trivial amount would make my point. I handed the coins to Horse Man.

“From your heart, please. These are nothing. Not coin, only paper.”

Horse Man tried to hand the coins back to me, but I refused to take them. Sayid finally intervened. He said something to Horse Man, in Arabic. At first, their conversations seemed friendly. They spoke softly and slowly, but soon their hushed tones erupted into shouts and curses. Horse Man raised his hand over his head, and he screamed to the heavens. I thought he might strike one of us, and I leaned forward to intercept the blow. Instead, Horse Man picked up his turban and walked away. His poor horse trailed behind him.

Sayid lowered his head and waved for us to follow him toward the next pyramid. Along the way, I asked him about Horse Man and his people.

“Those people are trash,” he said. “Nobody likes them. They are uneducated and filthy people. They smell of shit. Nobody wants them in the city. They live in the hills.”

I was surprised by Sayid’s candor.

“What did you say to him? Why did he leave?” I asked.

“I told him, ‘I will find you later, and I will give you some of what you pay me.’ But I won’t.” Sayid looked sad. It was the only time that day that he broke character.

We reached the third and last of the great pyramids: Menkaure. Once again, we hopped over the chain and I snapped a few more photos while Teresa posed. Sayid was a fine director. He knew all the best angles, but he still seemed upset. I would always wonder what Horse Man had said to him.

Sayid led us across the plateau, past mysterious walls and pits that he would not, or could not explain to us. I stopped to admire the view. I looked toward the eastern horizon, to Giza, and then all the way to Cairo; its cityscape obscured by a thick haze of smog. Sayid turned around to find me.

“You eat too much chicken! You can’t climb.” Sayid rubbed his belly and laughed at me.

Go to hell, I whispered.

We strolled down the hill, and the Great Sphinx rose into view straight ahead. The statue faces east, toward the Nile, but its rump was unmistakable. A shallow set of stairs led us to a viewing stand alongside the Sphinx. The platform was crowded with tourists. They came from Japan and Russia and Brazil and each of them snapped self-portraits and laughed and smiled. We stood off to the side; away from the crowd, and admired the statue. Then I realized two things. First, the Great Sphinx is amazing in every way. Second, Sayid had led us around the rear of every pyramid and tomb in the complex. That’s why we had never encountered any tourists. That’s why we never saw the touts with camels or the merchants hawking trinkets. It’s also why we never saw the paved road that encircles the pyramid complex or the signs that directed tourists where to climb into the pyramids (and where not to). Sayid was an unlicensed guide, and he risked arrest for touring the necropolis with us. So he avoided the police, and he avoided many of the highlights. He especially disliked being near the Sphinx, in plain sight of the uniformed tourism police.

Teresa loved everything about the Sphinx, but she wondered about its condition. The lower portion rests below-grade, in an artificial pit. Those portions were discolored, and the surface was plated in square, stone blocks. “The colors don’t match,” she said, “and the stonework looks clumsy, like it was done later.”

Sayid paused and frowned. “Seven thousand years ago…”

In fact, the masonry was added later. The upper half of the Sphinx – the back and head – was carved from a small hill on the plateau. The lower half of the Sphinx – its legs and chest – was carved down, into the bedrock. Over the years, the pit filled with sand and gravel and it sat that way for millennia. So the upper half was exposed to sun and blowing sand, and its condition and color reflect that weathering. But the lower half, buried in sand, was protected from those elements. Over time, water seeped into the pit and damaged the statue. Masons have tried to repair some of the damage, but the work is far from perfect, and far from complete.

Sayid didn’t care at all about the Sphinx. He forced a weak smile and told us it was time to go to the papyrus museum. We followed him down a staircase, past a security checkpoint, and out to the streets of Giza. Teresa protested. She wasn’t done with the pyramids, but Sayid told us not to worry. He insisted we could go back to the pyramids, but only after we visited the museum. For that one last moment, I trusted him. I trusted him, not because I believed him, but because I had yet to pay him.

We were surprised to find a busy neighborhood just outside the gates. It was nothing like the bucolic gardens of Mena House just a mile away. Apartment blocks towered overhead while taxis, mounds of trash, and crowds of men filled the streets. I looked around for a papyrus museum, or anything that might resemble a museum, but all I recognized were two restaurants: Kentucky Fried Chicken and Pizza Hut. Other stores advertised drinks and souvenirs and discount hotel rooms. This busy quarter was the official exit to the pyramid complex, and it seemed designed to swallow fatigued tourists. The only thing missing was the familiar sign: Please Exit Through the Gift Shop.

“This way, the museum is here,” Sayid said. He led us to a nearby gift shop and into the hands of his accomplice. The store was little more than a front for the shady pitch that would follow. Shelves of tacky souvenirs lined the walls, but they were just props.

The shopkeeper, a middle-aged man with bright eyes and a serious paunch, smiled warmly. He reached out to shake my hand, but I declined. “Please, sit, be comfortable,” the shopkeeper said as he pointed to two folding chairs staged in the center of the floor. “Have some tea. Is no charge, hospitality.” We accepted his offer of a seat, but we refused the tea. Then, with the practiced hand of a Vegas magician, the shopkeeper produced a silver tray lined with glass bottles, each filled with a brightly colored perfume that Egyptians call essence. The hapless shopkeeper unleashed a story about perfumes and pharaohs, but the details of his pitch were lost on us. Teresa looked at me and frowned, and I looked at Sayid and scowled. We were not interested in souvenirs or essence or papyrus, and, even though I knew the answer, I asked Sayid where the museum was. The shopkeeper interrupted me. He insisted that the papyrus museum was upstairs, and maybe it was, but we never saw it. Instead, Teresa and I jumped to our feet and left the store. Sayid chased after us.

Teresa marched across the street on her way back to the pyramids. I followed her, and Sayid followed me. “They won’t let you in,” Sayid called out to us, but we ignored him. He grew desperate, and, for a moment, he devolved from practiced hustler to amateur peddler. He insisted we must be tired from our long walk, and he offered to hail a taxi for us. Then he insisted we must be hungry. He knew a few excellent restaurants, he exclaimed, and he offered to show us the way. Still we ignored him. Two guards blocked our entrance to the security checkpoint. One of the guards scolded us, but the only word we understood was No. The other guard cursed Sayid for a very long minute. Sayid pleaded and whimpered. I can only imagine what he said, but I’m sure it involved baksheesh. Eventually, the guards relented and let us through. A crowd of touts stood in the shade near the checkpoint. They teased Sayid, and he waved them off with an angry flip of his hand. Teresa climbed the staircase and stormed back to the Sphinx. Sayid and I could barely keep up with her.

By then, Teresa was in full command. I was just a passenger, and Sayid was a mere stowaway on our trip. Teresa marched back up the dusty hill toward the pyramids, and she stopped all along the way to photograph the scenery. Sayid begged us to stop, and I did, but only long enough to say goodbye. I reached into my wallet and pulled out a fifty-pound note, and then another one. It was more money than Sayid deserved, but I hoped my extreme generosity would end the charade. I thanked Sayid for his time and tried to pay him.

“What is this? This is nothing.” Sayid looked down at his feet and shook his head. I had killed him twice.

“You said I could pay you whatever I want,” I answered.

Sayid protested and pretended to return the notes to me. He feigned shock and embarrassment. He stepped back and held his arms out wide. The show was getting good, I thought.

“No, Jeremy, this is nothing. Two hundred, at least, for my time.”

I didn’t move.

“At least one more, one hundred fifty is OK. I can feed my children with one hundred fifty. Please, from your heart.” Sayid pleaded his case, but I stopped listening. I wished Sayid well, but he wasn’t done with me. He shouted after us, loudly and angrily, in Arabic. Whatever he said, it was very unpleasant. I wondered how much money the guards would demand from Sayid, for their earlier discretion. I wondered whether Horse Man would find Sayid. I wondered whether Sayid the Hustler would become Sayid the Hunted.

Teresa was halfway up the hill when I caught up to her. She asked me how much I paid Sayid, and she was surprised by my answer.

“That’s a lot of money, isn’t it?”

“Yes, but he was OK,” I answered.

“Watch out!” A tall, slender man shouted at us, and pointed down the road. We turned to see a microbus racing up the hill, on the wrong side of the road. The driver would have killed us, or so Slender Man wanted us to believe. I suspected a sinister plot. The narrow escape was choreographed to look like a near-miss, I thought, and Slender Man was just another hustler. We continued up the hill, but Slender Man stood in our way. He was at least six inches taller than me and wore a white djellaba and turban. His face was dressed in a fantastic grey and white beard that flowed to his waist, and he carried a long, wooden staff. “Tickets please, show me your tickets,” he commanded in a deep voice.

Teresa complied, warily. “We don’t need a guide,” she said.

“My queen! I am not a guide, I am a watchman.” His words were polite, but his tone angry.

Teresa was not impressed with the watchman’s bravado. She intended to see the pyramids again and the watchman didn’t scare her at all. We walked a wide circle around him and headed back up the hill. The watchman wouldn’t take the hint. He followed us and called out to Teresa several times. “My queen, did you see…” or “My queen, did you know…”. We ignored his calls for several minutes, and the watchman grew angry. “This is my job! Please, the paper. Whatever you can. Where are you from? I can make change!” The watchman screamed and cursed us, but we just kept walking. Soon his voice faded in the breeze.

We explored the pyramid complex, alone, for another hour. Along the way, we found several signs that described the pyramids and the temples. They didn’t say much, but they were more informative than Sayid. We also walked around cemeteries and pits that Sayid had skipped. They weren’t much to see, but we looked at them anyway. A young boy on horseback approached us. He held the reins of a second horse and asked if we wanted a ride. The boy smiled and laughed, and he didn’t mind at all when we declined his offer. He just kicked his heels into his horse and rode off to find another customer. Teresa sat on a boulder and skimmed through the images on our digital camera. If it were up to her, we might have toured the plateau one more time that afternoon, but I complained that I was hot and thirsty and tired. Our tour was over.

We strolled down the hill, back to Mena House. While we were out, the housekeepers had cleaned our room and left fresh towels and linens for us. A bouquet of fresh flowers decorated the writing desk. We felt like dignitaries returning to a hero’s welcome. Teresa wanted to stay forever, and I readily agreed. That afternoon, I took a long nap while Teresa sat on the patio and read for awhile.

“I want to go for a swim,” Teresa said. I looked up and saw her standing over me. I had slept for an hour, and forgot where we were. “I want to see the pool,” she continued. It’s supposed to be very nice.”

In fact, the Mena House swimming pool is very nice. It stretches a hundred feet from stem to stern and its water is sparkling clean, which is particularly surprising given its proximity to the open desert. Neat rows of lounge chairs and large umbrellas surround the pool, but, on our visit, most of the chairs were empty. I found a corner to myself and, from the comfort of dry land, I watched Teresa float in the pool for an hour or so. A waiter greeted me and asked if I wanted to see a menu. I wasn’t hungry, but I wondered whether they sold beer or wine. “Yes,” the waiter said, to tourists they do.

Teresa wrapped herself in an oversized beach towel and sat in a lounge chair next to me. I asked her about the pool. She said the water was warm and comfortable. I asked about the other swimmers. She said that everyone was friendly, and she guessed that most of the other swimmers were European. That would explain the dress code, I thought. Most of the women in the pool wore one- or two-piece bathing suits, which, like alcohol, are tolerated at tourist hotels. But there was one family that stood out among the others. The mother wore a floor-length, loose robe – the abaya – and a scarf, and she relaxed on a lounge chair by the side of the pool. Her husband wore swim trunks and played with his shirtless sons in the water. The daughter, who was perhaps fourteen or fifteen years old, wore something I had read about, but never seen: a burkini. The burkini comes in several styles of varying modesty. Most versions, like the one the girl wore, include a loose, thigh-length, long-sleeved tunic and matching leggings and scarf. I asked Teresa what she thought of the burkini. “It looks comfortable,” she said.

That night, as we lay down to bed, we discussed our trip and debated where to go and what to see over the next month. We thought we might visit an oasis or sail down the Nile in a felucca, but first we would visit Cairo.





The Eighteenth Floor





It was time to check out, and we were running late. We lugged our bags across the compound to the lobby, and the desk clerk asked about our stay. The clerk asked whether we enjoyed our stay, he asked whether we enjoyed the pyramids, and he asked whether we took two candy bars from the minibar in our room. I was surprised by the last question so I shook my head and grimaced. “The Kit Kat bars? There were two of them? In the minibar?” he sheepishly asked. I shook my head again. The clerk frowned and made a short phone call – to whom I do not know – and asked us to wait. Teresa and I paced the lobby, and the clerk paced behind the desk, and we all waited for the phone to ring. Teresa joked about having to solve our own Agatha Christie mystery – The Case of the Missing Candy – and I suggested we hijack a camel and make a run for it. The clerk seemed not to share our amusement. The phone rang, and the clerk rushed to answer. We leaned against the desk and waited to hear the verdict. The clerk noticed that we were eavesdropping, and he lowered his voice to a whisper. Why, I don’t know, because we don’t speak Arabic, and we had absolutely no idea what was said. The clerk hung up the phone, thanked us for waiting, and asked whether we wanted to hire a car and driver for the ride to Cairo. It would be a little more expensive than a taxi, but much more comfortable, he explained. We agreed to the car and driver, but whether the clerk ever solved the case of the missing candy I can’t say because he didn’t tell us and we didn’t have time to ask.

“Hello, my name is Ibrahim. You are going to downtown Cairo?” Ibrahim worked for Rawas, a professional car service that catered to international business travelers and moneyed tourists. He wore a grey, pin-stripe suit and polished black loafers, and he drove a sparkling clean Mercedes sedan. I apologized and told Ibrahim that there had been some mistake. Surely he and his car were meant for someone more important than us, but Ibrahim smiled and loaded our backpacks into the trunk. The guards opened the gate and we waved goodbye to Mena House while Ibrahim adjusted the cabin temperature for us.

The trip to Cairo was only eight miles, but took more than an hour. Ibrahim was friendly and talked the whole way. He was born and raised in Giza, he said, and traffic was worse than ever. Then he honked the horn and said c’est la vie as he merged into the melee. Teresa quizzed him about Cairo. She wanted to know what to see and where to go. I tried to pay attention to their conversation but was distracted by the city and the noise. I stared out the window and watched the world pass by in slow motion. Young men swarmed the sidewalks. They traveled in packs of five or six. Most of the young men wore a uniform of blue jeans and T-shirts, and they draped their arms across each other’s shoulders as they walked, like a friendly, rambling huddle. Elderly women, dressed in long black abayas, paced through lanes of stalled traffic. They carried bags of facial tissue and offered the packets to passing drivers, but there were few buyers. Mopeds zipped between the lanes and around the tissue sellers. Their drivers and passengers showed no fear. At one corner, I watched a dog rummage through a mound of trash. He found something interesting and ran off with it. On another corner, I noticed a sedan parked along a curb. Its front wheel was booted and I wondered what, in a city of such utter madness, that driver did to earn a boot. Above all else, I noticed the noise. The blare of horns flooded my ears and squeezed my brain.

In Giza, the traffic was unbearable, but in Cairo, the traffic was even worse. When we neared the city, our car stopped on a bridge over the Nile. I could see our hotel, on the far side of the river. It took twenty minutes to cross the Nile and circle the road into the hotel driveway. Armed guards swept the car with mirrors and a bomb-sniffing dog, and they quizzed Ibrahim about his passengers. They seemed to trust him – and his Rawas pedigree – but we garnered more suspicion than ever. A security guard met us in the driveway and asked whether we had reservations. “This is the Hilton Ramses” he said, just to clarify. It was obvious to him, and everyone around us, that we didn’t belong there. Hilton Ramses was a business-class hotel, and we had no business being there. The security guard asked for my name and checked his lists, twice. Even then he seemed not to trust us. He escorted us to the front desk and watched carefully as we checked in. Teresa told me not to worry. She surrendered our passports to the desk clerk and explored the lobby while I waited for our room keys.

Our room was on the eighteenth floor with a city view of Cairo in all its chaotic glory. I opened the balcony door to a rush of warm, dusty, noisy air. I could still hear the traffic and the horns, but, from that height, the sound was almost interesting, like a neighbor’s wind chime. I looked down at the apartment blocks that surrounded the hotel. The buildings were about eight or ten stories tall, and they were all covered in grey dust, like someone framed the city in daguerreotype. Then I noticed the rooftops. I had never seen so many satellite dishes in one place. They were like barnacles on an old ship. They covered every inch of every roof within sight. I could have spent all day on that balcony, studying the cityscape, but Teresa had other plans. She wanted to find lunch and visit the Egyptian Museum that afternoon. I closed the balcony door and drew the curtains.

We stopped by the concierge desk in the lobby and asked for directions to the museum. It would be an easy walk, just across the street, the concierge assured us. He unfurled a tourist map of Cairo and spread it over his desk. The map listed all the major historic sites and neighborhoods of Cairo – in English and Arabic. The concierge drew a line across the map, from the hotel to the museum, and he handed the map to me. Teresa asked if there were a restaurant at the museum, but the concierge wouldn’t commit to an answer. “Yes, no. Sometimes there is,” he said with a smile. Just in case, he opened a binder and flipped through pages filled with menus for a thousand restaurants in a thousand varieties. There were too many choices and, in the end, the concierge suggested we look in the shopping center next door. “There are several restaurants, please enjoy,” he said.

As promised, we found several restaurants in the neighboring shopping center. On the ground floor we found a café, of sorts. Its menu listed hot drinks and shisha flavors, but no food. We followed an escalator up, flight after flight, and looked in every window. The stores attracted upper-middle class patrons. They sold clothing and furniture and housewares – nothing we needed. Thick clouds of cigarette smoke choked the air, and pop music blared from speakers on every floor. We found another restaurant with a menu posted out front. It promised grilled meats and rice dishes and plates of pasta, but the doors were closed and the lights were off. We traveled up one last flight, to the top floor, and there we saw a familiar sign: the golden arches of McDonald’s. The restaurant was packed.

Teresa looked at me and asked, “Are you sure?”

“No, but it’s open,” I said.

The restaurant filled a wide corner of the top floor. It could seat at least a hundred customers, and still it was full. We queued near the registers and inspected the menu board. The pictures looked familiar, but the descriptions were lettered in Arabic. I jokingly asked Teresa if she knew what she wanted, but it didn’t matter. Before either of us could decode the menu, it was our turn to order.

“Hello,” I said.

The clerk was dumbfounded. He opened his mouth to reply, but no words came out. He held up a finger, looked left and right, and called back to the kitchen. A cheerful, young woman stuck her head out the door. “Hello, and welcome to McDonald’s. How may I help you?” she asked.

I ordered the Big Mac meal, and Teresa asked for a hamburger.

“Chicken or beef?” the woman asked with a smile.

It was my turn to be dumbfounded. I opened my mouth to reply, but no words came out. I had never heard of a chicken Big Mac, and I wondered what it would look and taste like. Teresa was less adventurous. “Beef,” she answered for both of us. The woman thanked us for our order and asked us to take a seat. We found a booth in the middle of the restaurant and watched the crowd come and go while we waited for our food. If not for the loud, Arabic pop music and cigarette smoke, I might have forgotten that we were in Cairo. The customers were mostly kids and teenagers. They wore khakis, jeans, T-shirts, and sneakers, and they traveled in groups of four or five. Some stuck their noses in their phones, but most joked and laughed and ate and drank. Nobody noticed us, or, if they did, they didn’t care. A few minutes later, a clerk delivered a tray of food and drinks to our table. I won’t say much about the food. Teresa noticed an unfamiliar spice on her hamburger, like black pepper, but stronger. Other than that, the food looked and tasted exactly like you would expect from McDonald’s, but I wished I had tried the chicken.

After lunch, we stopped by a cinema on the same floor. Like the rest of the shopping center, it was modern and clean and stank of cigarette smoke. A sign posted on the door listed the titles and screen times. We recognized several films, including the latest rendition of Godzilla. I thought it might be fun to see a movie, but Teresa worried that the museum would close before we got there.

“Yeah, about that,” I said.

“What’s wrong?” Teresa asked.

“The hotel website says the museum is right across the street, but I didn’t see it anywhere.”

“We have the map.”

“If the museum were across the street, we wouldn’t need a map.”

I’m sure the hotel staff meant well when they cited their proximity to the museum. On a map, the museum doesn’t look that far away, but this was Cairo after all. In Cairo, across the street took on new meaning. We’d have to dash through moving traffic on El Galaa, dart across on-ramps and off-ramps that carry traffic to and from the 6 October Highway overhead, dodge lines of speeding microbuses at Midan Abdel Moneim Riad, the city’s busiest microbus station, and race traffic across Ramses Street to reach the museum. Even then, the nearest entrance to the museum was shuttered, and the main entrance – we would soon learn – was barricaded and nearly impassable. And that’s why we needed a map to reach the museum that was, in its own way, across the street.

In other cities, we might have walked to the corner, waited for the walk signal, and crossed the street without much thought. But remember, this was no simple street, and, in Cairo, there are no traffic lights, no stop signs, no walk signals, and no marked lanes. Even the direction of travel is subject to the personal preference of the drivers. With all that in mind, we decided not to hurry. We stood on the curb and watched waves of traffic ebb and flow. First, a wave rushed from left to right, and we thought it was a one-way road in that direction. Then a few drivers snuck up the road, against the flow, until traffic rushed from right to left. At times, traffic moved in both directions. Drivers ran at and around each other in an undulating game of chicken. We wondered whether the traffic would ever break, even for a moment, and allow safe crossing, but it never did. Meanwhile, other pedestrians – being much braver than we – stepped off the curb and into traffic. They disappeared behind trucks and buses and we never saw them again. Teresa suggested we hail a taxi (to cross the street), but I convinced her that we would be fine. “Everyone else is doing it,” I said. We dove into the madness. The cars and trucks and buses and microbuses and scooters never slowed or stopped. Instead, we hugged their bumpers and fenders and weaved left and right through moving traffic, never more than a few inches from certain death. We sidestepped cars, paused for trucks, danced between buses, skirted microbuses, cursed at scooters, and landed safely on a sidewalk on the far side of the chaos.

“Well, that was the worst game of Frogger, ever,” I said.

Teresa laughed, and we both exhaled.

“OK, so where’s the museum?” I asked. A tall, chain-link fence blocked our path and circled the block. There were no signs or entrances for a museum or anything else.

Teresa inspected our map, followed the concierge’s dotted line, and agreed. “I think that’s the museum, but we’re on the wrong side,” she said.

We followed the sidewalk around the block. Along the way, I looked skyward, above a wall of thick hedges and more chain-link fences. There stood the hulking remains of a fire-ravaged office building. It had been the headquarters for the National Democratic Party before protestors stormed and burned the building during the revolution. Our map insisted we should turn left at the next side road, but it was blocked by more chain-link fence, and had been for a long time. We held our faces to the fence and scanned the area. Instead of a museum, we saw rows of armed soldiers and armored personnel carriers. Teresa checked the map again. The concierge’s line insisted this was our turn.

We looked for an opening, but there were none. We looked in every direction, and hoped to find the museum entrance. “Down there,” I said, “there’s a big road down there. We’ll just walk around the block.” What I saw, down the road, was a low, grassy hill surrounded by a busy road: Midan Tahrir.

Teresa frowned. Tahrir Square was the last place she wanted to see. The public square – which is actually a wide traffic circle around a grassy knoll – is where protests ignited into revolution and hundreds of people were killed in 2011.

“It’s that or turn around and walk back to the hotel,” I said.

We followed the sidewalk around the block, past small shops and a grocery store and parking lots. Along the way, I kept an eye toward Tahrir. I scanned the streets for protestors or soldiers or a memorial, but all I saw that day was a steady stream of traffic driving around the rotary. We marched around the long block, back toward the museum, but soon the sidewalk was blocked by more chain-link fences and concrete barriers. The barriers pushed us into the street where traffic roared by at unholy speeds.

As we marched through traffic, another pedestrian stopped and looked at us. “Where are you from?” the man asked.

“The United States,” I said.

The man stepped back and smiled. “Really? But how is that so? There are no Americans here now, only Egyptians. Welcome to you!” He waved and darted into traffic.

Teresa tapped my elbow. “That’s it, down that road,” she rightly said of the museum. Its glorious, dark pink façade was unmistakable, but coils of razor wire and soldiers armed with rifles blocked our path. We stared through the chain-link fence once more. Armored vehicles, some with mounted guns, filled the street. There was no obvious entrance, but Teresa was desperate to visit the museum. It was one of her biggest goals for our trip, second only to seeing the pyramids. She noticed a police officer standing next to a tank. He wore a gleaming white uniform and shiny black shoes, and he was armed with a pistol holstered on his belt. He would know how to enter the museum, she thought.

“The museum is closed. Come back tomorrow,” he said.

Teresa frowned again, but there was nothing we could do.

I suggested, instead, that we walk along the Nile, and Teresa agreed. “OK, whatever,” she sighed. We rushed through the traffic, again, and made our way to a busy corner on the Corniche, a long road that hugs the river. There we saw something new and surprising: two police officers, dressed in those white uniforms, directed traffic. One of the officers noticed us, and did something wholly unexpected. He held up his hand to stop traffic. The drivers were surprised – most ignored his commands – but we were able to cross the road safely. It was one of the few times on our trip that we saw an officer direct traffic, and it was the only time on our trip that an officer stopped traffic for us.

Our walk along the Nile was less exotic and romantic than we expected. The shore was crowded with floating restaurants and bars, and they competed for business by blasting music from their decks. We followed a broad sidewalk along the river, away from the noise. Trees and benches lined the curb, but we were too tired to sit. Instead, we leaned over the wall and stared at the dark water. The gentle current carried flotillas of trash downriver.

“It looks just like the Charles,” I said.

“Yeah, I suppose so,” Teresa answered.

“We’ll make it to the museum tomorrow. Then we can move on.”

That night, we ordered take-out from a restaurant in the shopping center near the hotel. We ate dinner in our room and watched the sun set over the city. When night fell, Cairo came to life. Fireworks colored the sky. The noise echoed off the buildings in every direction. Then more fireworks, on a different block.

“Look left, over there,” I said.

“No, over there to the right, look, look!” Teresa shouted.

We counted a dozen displays that night, and Teresa loved all of them. Cairo, from the eighteenth floor, is quite pleasant, I thought.



⁂



On our way to the museum, the next morning, we stopped by the concierge desk to ask for help. The concierge, a robust man with a booming voice and broad smile, introduced himself with a hearty handshake.

“My name is Samii. How can I help you today?”

“We want to take a train, to Luxor,” I said. “We tried to buy tickets on-line last night, but couldn’t. I don’t know what happened.”

“Of course, I can help.” Samii hummed a rhythmic tune while he shuffled through a folder of itineraries and price sheets. “Ah, here it is,” he said as he unfolded a brochure on the desk. The brochure advertised Watania Sleeping Train, a private rail company that catered to tourists. They run trains between major cities in Egypt, but only at night. Armed guards provide security aboard the trains, so they’re relatively safe, but we wanted to travel during the day, to see the countryside and meet Egyptians, not tourists.

“Please,” I said, “we want to travel by day train, not sleeper.”

Samii apologized profusely. Foreigners are not allowed to ride day trains, he explained.

I asked about night trains, but not on Watania. “We want to travel like Egyptians,” I said.

Samii sighed. He made a phone call and shouted into the handset. The only word I recognized was al Uqṣur, the Arabic name for Luxor.

“OK,” he said. “The train will leave tomorrow evening, at nine o’clock. The trip will take about ten hours, and the fare will be one hundred pound each, plus a small service fee, thirty pounds.” Samii told us that we would have to pay cash and submit a copy of our passports. The tickets would be ready that afternoon. “You will like Luxor,” he said. “Very small, very nice.”

Teresa was thrilled. She wanted to love Cairo, but the city was too big and too hectic for her to enjoy. She loved the history, but not the noise. She loved the Nile, but not pollution. Luxor would be our happy medium between the old and the new. Samii would arrange our train tickets, and all we had to do was enjoy ourselves for one more day in Cairo. So we looked forward to the Egyptian Museum, and we looked forward to Luxor.



⁂



We found the museum right where we left it the day before – in the middle of its own little war zone. The museum was looted during the revolution, and, though many pieces have since been returned, the building remains a major target for theft and terrorism. Security here is omnipresent, and our passage felt like a prisoner exchange, without the fanfare. Armed troops and uniformed police guarded the road around the museum, and we zigzagged between barriers topped with razor wire. We passed the armored personnel carriers we had counted the day before, and, from that angle, I could see inside the trucks. A dozen or so men sat inside each one, on little wooden benches. They looked bored and tired and hot. Their uniforms seemed too big for their lean frames, and their rifles looked heavy. Nobody smiled. Other soldiers and a few police officers patrolled the road. They ignored us, but we couldn’t ignore them. Their presence reinforced everything Teresa feared about Egypt.

If you don’t mind the looming threat of vandals or bombings, the Egyptian Museum is worth a long visit. Designed by Marcel Dargnon, a French architect, and constructed by Garozzo-Zaffarani, an Italian firm, the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities – as it is officially known – opened to the public in 1902. The neoclassical design, which was then all the rage in Europe and the United States, incorporates elements from classical Greek and Roman architecture. The twin inspirations also acknowledge two long periods of Egyptian history, each of which earn a place within the exhibit halls. The two-story building overlooks a broad lawn crossed with paved trails and adorned with sculptures, ancient and modern, from across the country. It must have been a tranquil setting, a century ago, when most visitors arrived by horse-drawn carriage or electric tram. Today, the masterpiece museum, encircled by office buildings and swaths of asphalt and a permanent military envoy, is anything but peaceful.

There were few visitors outside the museum that morning, and we admired the lawn and its sculptures in solitude. A young man, about my height, but very thin, offered to take us on a guided tour of the museum. He wore a lanyard around his neck, and promised that the fee – fifty pounds per hour – was set by the museum. (It was, coincidentally, the same rate I paid Sayid, at the pyramids.) The guide seemed professional and sincere. His English was excellent and his diction clear. Even so, we politely declined his offer. We bought our tickets and passed through the security checkpoint. A guard pointed to my camera and then to a shack on the far side of the lawn. His sentiment was clear: no photos, please.

We began our tour of the museum at a gift shop near the entrance. Excepting a few old souvenirs and worn books, its shelves were bare. We wanted a guidebook, to plan the rest of our trip through Egypt, but we would have to wait. There would be another, larger shop on the far side of the museum, near the restaurant, the clerk promised.

From the gift shop we wandered to a large foyer busy with guides and tourists and guards. The guides minded the tourists, and the guards minded the guides. Nobody minded us at all. A sign posted in the middle of the foyer described – very briefly – the museum’s layout. Beyond the foyer, we would find dozens of rooms and hundreds of thousands of artifacts spread across the building’s two massive floors. The floor plan followed a chronological order: turn left, an arrow suggested, and begin your visit here, in the Old Kingdom. We might have done just that, but a tour group blocked the hall. Exhausted parents and bored children rocked on their heels and fanned themselves with pamphlets. They were day-trippers who, like thousands of others, traveled to Cairo, by bus, from a resort on the Red Sea, a few hours away. The museum was just one stop on their day trip (Giza and the pyramids would come later), and the guides were in a hurry. They pointed here and there and described the exhibits in swift detail. We tried to pass the group, but they spilled across the hall like a pack of lost puppies. So we ignored the arrows and studied the history of Egypt in reverse chronological order. Our tour made less sense, but our visit was more enjoyable.

The museum halls were very dark, too dark, and I wondered whether someone forgot to pay the electric bill. Then I noticed that the windows were blocked out or painted over. In every exhibit room of every hall, the corners were pitch black, and the display cases were obscured by shadows. We strolled around the first floor, through a dozen rooms, each filled with glass display cases or monuments perched on pedestals. We marched backward through time. Centuries and millennia passed and history unwound with our every step. We witnessed Egypt through the ages: Roman, Greek, New Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Old Kingdom with a few intermediary periods thrown in along the way. We admired tools and weapons and papyri and clothing and all the incredibly interesting and significant artifacts one might expect to find in one of the world’s largest and most important museums. The treasures of King Tut, unearthed near Luxor in 1922, filled a special exhibit hall, but I was more interested in the relatively mundane objects I found elsewhere.

On the top floor, I found an exhibit of scale-model boats. There were hundreds of model boats, and I was surprised by their craftsmanship and detail. Some were carved from wood or bone; others were sculpted from clay. All were constructed with careful accuracy, and each told a unique story. Some models were faithful recreations of barques and barges; others seemed to represent supernatural functions. Life-like figurines adorned the decks on many of the models: a crew of rugged men, dressed for work on the river, rowed or tended sails. Despite their age, the models were in remarkably pristine condition and ready to sail, here or in the afterlife.

One other room caught my attention above all others. Its contents simultaneously horrified and fascinated me. The ancient display cases – aged timber with glass walls – housed a zoological garden of mummified animals. Some of the mummified animals were wrapped in linen and laid to rest in ornate sarcophagi. Other animals were desiccated and stacked carefully, like sacks of flour, lots of flour. I counted dozens of species including gazelles, dogs, monkeys, rams, and crocodiles. Their numbers and variety would have filled Noah’s arc. In fact, I later learned that so many mummified animals were unearthed in the nineteenth century that they were sold en masse as fertilizer, and shipped by the ton to England. An article in English Illustrated Magazine, a turn-of-the-century periodical, reported that one ship carried 38,000 pounds of mummified cats. The author estimated that one shipment included the remains of 180,000 animals, and there were several shipments. I wondered how many exhibit halls those cats would have filled.

We explored the museum for several hours and might never have left if the air-conditioning worked. Instead, we surrendered the halls to another wave of tour groups and looked for the exit. Along the way, we stopped at the mezzanine level where an arrow pointed to the restrooms. WCs, the sign read. The water closets were squalid. The rooms had no electricity, and the only light came from a slim ray of sun that sneaked through the blacked-out windows. The tile floors were pitted and worn slick from a century of use and neglect. There was no toilet paper (there never is), and there was no running water. On my way out, I bumped into a janitor. She held out the pocket of her apron and shook it with bravado: baksheesh. On the wall, right above her, another sign read No Tipping.

On our way out of the museum, we found that second, larger gift shop the clerk had mentioned earlier. The store stretched a hundred feet wide and a hundred feet deep. Shelves and pegboards lined the walls, and display cases and sale racks filled the floor. But the shelves and pegboards and display cases and sale racks were bare. There was nothing to display, and there was nothing for sale. A hand-written sign pointed toward the exit, on the far side of the shop. Our sneakers squeaked on the floor, and the sound echoed across the empty room.

Outside, we found a café surrounded by a courtyard furnished with tables and chairs. Like the gift shop, the café was there, but its shelves were empty. Lunch would wait. We rested in the shade of an umbrella and scanned our map. It was our last afternoon in Cairo, and we wanted something fun to do. Teresa drew a finger across the map and across the river. “There,” she said. “Let’s go see Gezirah.”

Gezirah is a large island in the Nile, between Cairo and Giza. We had read about it the day before, when we searched for hotels near the museum. The island earned universal critical acclaim, on all counts, from travel writers, tourists, and on-line guidebooks. Jonathan Raban, in his essay Arabia, wrote that Gezirah had “the perpetual-Sunday-morning air of very expensive suburbia.” Other writers mentioned boutique shops and fine dining and all those things fit to serve the European workers and expats who live and work on the island. Many of those foreigners lived in an affluent neighborhood called Zamalek, on the northern half of the island, where we would find embassies housed in old villas surrounded by tidy lawns and security guards. That luxurious lifestyle came with a hefty price, though. The hotels we checked were expensive, even compared to Mena House, so we settled, instead, on the Hilton, in downtown. But Gezirah was within walking distance from the museum, just across the river, and Teresa couldn’t resist the temptation.

We crossed the Nile and followed the current downstream. A linear park trailed the riverbank for a thousand yards. Flowering trees and thick hedges decorated acres of trimmed lawns. Parks like these are open to the public, for a small fee, but that afternoon there were no customers. Teresa wanted to visit the park and rest for awhile, but I was too hungry. We paused for a minute, near the gate, and looked east, through stands of shade trees, toward downtown Cairo. Our hotel towered above the river, a few hundred feet away, but it may as well have been on a different planet. In Cairo, the streets were wild and untamed, but on Gezirah, the road was calm and quiet. The difference between the two was striking and very much appreciated.

A mile or so later, and after a few twists and turns, we stumbled upon a block lined with clothiers, jewelers, pharmacies, and – best of all – a bookstore. Teresa and I are bibliophiles, confirmed and consummated, born to browse shelves at bookstores around the world, and there, at last, was the first bookstore we found since we landed in Cairo a few days earlier. We hoped to find a copy of Lonely Planet Egypt, our preferred travel guide. At the start of our trip, we checked shops in Lisbon and at London Heathrow, but no luck. We thought we might find something at the Cairo airport or at a hotel or museum gift shop in Giza or Cairo, but no luck. Eventually, the mundane task of buying a guidebook took on a life of its own. We made a running joke of finding the book, but had, by then, surrendered all hope. Then we found that bookstore. I opened the door for Teresa, and a rush of cool, conditioned air welcomed us to the shop.

We browsed the aisles for a long while. We found books in Arabic, French, English, and a dozen other languages. Teresa looked for a novel, while I browsed the history section. The titles spanned a thousand generations, from pre-historic Egypt to the most recent revolution. King Tut and the pyramids were popular subjects, but I hoped to find something better, something obscure and less popular. And, of course, we wanted that guidebook.

“Welcome. Can I help you?” A young woman stood next to my shoulder. She wore slacks and a loose blouse and tucked her hair under a bright green scarf. I described the book we wanted, and she led me to a shelf filled with Lonely Planet titles. They had so many – USA, Australia, India – all the major countries, and cities too, in English, French, and Spanish. But nothing for Egypt, not in any language. The store catered to European expats, the clerk explained, and there was no market for guidebooks about Egypt. She very much wanted to help and suggested we try a nearby bookstore called Diwan. “It’s on the main road, next to a pizza shop,” she said with a smile.

We followed the clerk’s directions, and after a few blocks, we emerged at a broad boulevard capped with a parallel highway overhead. That boulevard, the 26 July highway, carried traffic between Cairo and Giza, and, for the first time since we stepped foot on Gezirah, we were surrounded by noise and exhaust. But we found Diwan, on the far side of the road, as promised, near Maison Thomas, a famous pizzeria. The shop was small and cramped and perfect in every way. The shelves and tables were stuffed and piled with books in every language. We found the travel section right away, but there too, the guidebooks served every country except Egypt. I asked the clerk if there were any other bookstores nearby. “Yes,” he said, but his command of English was not much better than my command of Arabic, so our conversation degraded after that. Teresa unfolded our map and showed it to the clerk. He inspected the map, scratched his chin, and frowned. Suddenly, the clerk stood up and shouted, “University!” I’m not sure what he said after that, but he pointed in the air and waved this way and that way till I was sure that he was giving directions. He walked us to the door and pointed down the road. Whatever else he may have said, it seemed that we were supposed to walk that way, across the island.

We stood on the corner and scanned our map for a university or another bookstore, but this time, we were interrupted.

“Are you lost?” The voice belonged to a friendly Scot. He had a brogue and a head full of gloriously thick, red hair.

“We’re looking for a bookstore,” I said, “but it’s not on the map.”

“Aye, you’re not far off, just turn around!” The friendly Scot laughed and pointed at Diwan.

“No, I’m sorry. We were just in there. The clerk suggested we try another place, at a university. I think he meant AUC?”

“Of course, I know it well. I worked there when I first moved to Cairo.” He pointed at the map. “We’re here,” he said, then he slid his finger across the page. “AUC is over here. Just look for the Coptic church. You can’t miss it. Stand with your back to the church and look across the street. There’s the AUC hostel.”

“A hostel? I’m sorry, we’re looking for a bookstore.”

“It’s the same!” The friendly Scot waved and vanished into the crowd.

I’d like to report that we followed the friendly Scot’s directions and found the AUC bookstore in short order, but that, I’m embarrassed to write, would be untrue. Compared to the rest of Cairo, Gezirah is fairly easy to navigate. The blocks span the island in fairly neat rows, and the rows are broken only by a few bends and turns. The street names – in English and Arabic – are set on metal signs, and the signs are bolted on the sides of buildings on almost every corner. The sidewalks are wide, but often blocked by mounds of garbage or parked cars. The stench of urine and excrement reminded us that we were still in Egypt. Intersections become de facto parking lots where drivers park three or four deep at popular corners. So, like most people, we soon abandoned the wide sidewalks and walked in the road. We followed the directions from our friendly Scot, counted off the blocks, took a turn or two, and were completely lost within a few minutes. We stood on the corner of a wide intersection and looked for help. Across the street, on the far corner, I saw a guardhouse.

Guardhouses are common in Cairo. They are simple buildings – glorified sheds really – open to the air, with room for one officer, two if they’re friendly. An officer leaned against the wall of this particular shed. His skin was dark and his face taut. He wore a blue uniform and strapped a rifle over his narrow shoulder. I hoped, but doubted, that he spoke English, but there was no one else to ask. The officer noticed us cross the street, and he snapped to attention, ready to offer aid. I asked whether he spoke English. He smiled, but no, he didn’t. So I unfolded the map and tried, in vain, to explain our situation. A car rolled into the intersection and the officer ordered the driver to halt. He leaned into the car and questioned the driver, but the driver didn’t speak English either. Then the officer spotted two boys kicking a ball down the street. He whistled – a loud, shrill whistle – and waved to them. The officer interrogated the boys and gesticulated toward the sky. The boys huddled together and considered the problem.

“AUC, this way.” One boy pointed down the street, then at me.

“Shokrun,” I said to the officer. “Thank you.”

The boys led us down a quiet, leafy street. We turned one corner, then another, and there it was: AUC. The university was across the street from a Coptic church, just like the friendly Scot promised. I tried to tip the boys for their help. I offered a crumpled five-pound note, but they refused my money. I offered it again – baksheesh! – but the boys raised their hands and walked away.

The AUC campus, which seemed to be just one building, filled a tree-covered lot in a quiet neighborhood. A short flight of stairs led up to a small plaza in front of the building where several men huddled around a table. They played a card game and smoked cigarettes. We climbed the stairs and crossed the plaza to the bookstore. Its lights were off, and the door was closed.

One of the men called out to us. “Closed,” he said

“Sorry, you said it’s closed?” I asked.

“Yes, closed for inventory. Sorry.”

Teresa and I looked at each other. Our quest, so simple in theory, had turned Homeric. We stood side-by-side, cupped our hands over our eyes, and peered through the dark window. I spotted a shelf of travel books on the far wall. Their spines bore the familiar logo of Lonely Planet. I gasped and tapped Teresa on the elbow. There, in the middle, one title was stacked with its cover facing out. A man dressed in a djellaba strolled across the book’s cover. The title was clear, even from a distance, in the shadows, through the glass wall of a closed bookstore: Lonely Planet Egypt.

“Please, do you know when the store will open?” I asked.

“Come back tomorrow, today it is closed, for inventory.”

Tomorrow. Tomorrow we would be on a train to Luxor.

“Please, the book we need is there on the shelf, we can see it.”

I’m not sure why, but I pleaded with the man. I didn’t know who or what he was, but he spoke with an air of authority on the subject of closed bookstores and inventories. Maybe he knew someone or something, I hoped. My pleas worked. The man lowered his cards and floated from his chair to the bookstore. We followed close behind. The store was dark and warm and the familiar scent of ink and paper filled the air.

“Which book do you need?”

Teresa pointed toward the Lonely Planet Egypt. The man scooped up the top copy (they had several) and looked on the back. He read the price to me and wrote a short note, in Arabic, on a piece of paper. I counted off a wad of notes and paid with exact change. The man put the book in a plastic bag and left the money on the counter with his note. Just like that, our quest was over – we had our book.

We celebrated our victory with dinner at a place recommended by our new guidebook: Didos. The authors wrote that Didos was a “noisy, crowded, pizza-and-pasta joint” not far from AUC, and that sounded perfect to us. We found the restaurant a few blocks away, on the ground floor of a white-brick building. It was late afternoon, and, just as Lonely Planet promised, the house was noisy and crowded. A dozen young women filled the small dining room. They laughed and shouted and laughed again. Then they posed for pictures in twos and threes and passed cameras and phones back and forth to be inspected for quality. And then they did it all again.

We sat at a table for two near the door, and a waiter brought two menus. The kitchen, small and packed with boxes and ingredients and pots and pans, was open to the room and offered a great view. Three cooks danced behind the counter, and their hands never stopped moving. They tossed pasta in bowls, chopped vegetables, and grilled meats. The orders came fast, but through all that, they never spoke to each other, not once. Still, they pushed out plate after plate of food, much of it in to-go bags for the delivery drivers who parked their scooters out front.

The menu was printed in Arabic and English, with drinks, pastas, pizzas, and assorted specialties spread across two long pages. Teresa was ready to order, but I hemmed and hawed for several minutes. When the waiter came to take our order, I panicked and ordered pizza, but, luckily, they were out for the day. Teresa told me to pick something else, and while she placed her order, I skimmed the menu again. Eventually I settled on chicken over pasta with a Fanta. Teresa ordered pasta with garlic and olive oil, and an orange Fanta as well. The cooks prepared our order in record time, and the food was glorious. My plate was filled with a mountain of spaghetti tossed in a mild tomato sauce, served with grilled chicken and mushrooms on the side. Teresa’s plate was simpler: spaghetti tossed in garlic and olive oil, dressed with crushed parsley. We raised our drinks and toasted ourselves. Then, after just a few bites, we switched plates. My tomato sauce had an unfamiliar aftertaste, and Teresa’s garlic was too strong for her palette. The waiter asked whether there were anything wrong with the food, but we assured him it was great, we just liked each other’s food a bit more than our own. When the waiter brought the bill, he apologized for not being able to make change. I told him not to worry, the meal was worth more than we paid.

On our walk back to the hotel, Teresa spotted a grocery store called Seoudi Market. The store filled a busy corner where drivers parked their cars five deep, till the intersection and the road were impassable. A passing taxi driver blew his horn for a few minutes, but the offending drivers were too busy shopping to notice. The taxi driver turned his car around and drove back the way he came. Meanwhile, other drivers rolled into the intersection, parked their cars, and ran into the market. We had never seen a more popular store and wondered what the attraction was.

Seoudi Market is a chain of grocery stores founded by Abdul Rahman Al-Seoudi, a wealthy Saudi businessman and medical doctor. Al-Seoudi was also an active leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, the same group that supported Morsi before his ouster and arrest. After the coup, the new Egyptian government, led by Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, enacted a series of programs to defund and criminalize the Brotherhood. As part of those initiatives, the government seized Al-Seoudi’s assets, including his chain of grocery stores. Police officers, veiled in black balaclavas, stormed Seoudi stores in neighborhoods across Cairo, but I’m not sure how the seizure affected Al-Seoudi. He was already in prison. As for the stores, the government promised not to fire any of the employees, and when we stumbled across that Seoudi market in Zamalek, a few days after the raids, the store was certainly open for business. Maybe customers rushed the store in an act of solidarity for its former owner, or maybe they rushed the store to support the new government and its policies, or maybe the store was just always that busy. We would never know.

Oblivious to the ongoing political drama, we stepped inside and found a familiar scene: a bright, modern grocery store like any other. The shelves were lined with packaged foods and drinks and household goods. A butcher prepared meats (still no pork), and a produce clerk stacked melons in a refrigerated display case. Teresa suggested we buy snacks and drinks for our trip to Luxor. We filled our arms with crackers and gum and candies and water and stood in the long line to pay. The cashiers rang up sales while several young men bagged the merchandise. After awhile, I realized that the baggers didn’t work at the store. They didn’t wear smocks or name tags, and they jostled for position near the conveyor belts. The baggers were freelancers who worked for tips. If a customer tipped the bagger, the bagger would carry the groceries to the customer’s car. We had no car, but I tipped our bagger anyway. He carried our bags to the curb and thanked us with a smile.

We tried to walk back to the hotel, but our grocery bags were too heavy, and the was sun too warm. A few blocks later, I flagged a taxi.

“Ramses Hilton,” I said, with a hint of question at the end.

“Ra-mes-ses?” The driver split the word into several syllables.

“Ra-mes-ses Hil-tone.” I repeated the words slowly and with an Arabic accent that served no purpose other than desperation.

For once, my butchered Arabic accent worked. The driver smiled and waved to the back seat. I loaded Teresa and the bags into the car and scouted a position for myself. The driver didn’t wait for me. He pulled into traffic while my leg dangled out the door. Teresa grabbed at the groceries with one hand and my shoulder with the other. I scrambled into the back seat as the driver sped across the island, toward downtown Cairo, at fifty miles an hour. A minute later, the driver stopped suddenly and completely and with such force that I flew forward in my seat and Teresa turned sideways in hers. Our bags landed on the floor, and our groceries spilled everywhere. We were on El Tahrir, the same road where we sat in traffic the day before for twenty minutes.

Our taxi was a Lada, an old Soviet model beloved in Eastern Europe, when Eastern Europe was still behind the Iron Curtain. The seats had no cushion, the windows would not roll up, and there was no air conditioner. Exhaust poured into the cabin from behind the firewall, and from the cars all around us. Teresa pulled her scarf over her face. I soaked a few napkins in water and covered my mouth and nostrils. The driver, unfazed by the pollution, lit a cigarette. A plastic clock glued to the dashboard kept the time. Once again, we hadn’t moved for twenty solid minutes.

Maybe we should have abandoned the taxi and walked the rest of the way, but we were too tired. Teresa closed her eyes and leaned back against the seat. I wiped my brow on my sleeve and cursed the traffic. It was then about five o’clock and time for Asr, the afternoon prayer. We had heard the call to prayer before, but nothing prepared us for what followed. A deafening roar erupted through the air with the force of a thousand jet engines. I squeezed my eyes shut and I struggled to breathe. I may have lost a filling. Teresa jumped from her seat, shrieked, and cried. The roar echoed across the valley for several terrible minutes, and we were stuck in that car – with the windows rolled down – unable to get away. We didn’t know it then, but El Tahrir passes within a hundred yards of Cairo Tower, which, at 614 feet, is the tallest building in Egypt. And being the tallest building in Egypt, Cairo Tower is also a popular tourist attraction. The tower has two restaurants, an observation deck, and the largest, most powerful loudspeakers known to man. That last part may or may not be a minor exaggeration. In any case, five times a day, a muezzin recites a call to prayer from the loudspeakers on the tower, and the call can be heard – clearly – three miles away. That’s what we heard – and felt – from our unlucky vantage point next to the tower.

In the end, our two-mile taxi ride took more than forty minutes. I don’t remember how much it cost, but I would have paid anything to get out of that car. The driver dropped us on the curb, in front of the hotel, to avoid the security checkpoint, I supposed, but I didn’t blame him. A hard-nosed guard stopped us at the gate and asked whether we had reservations. I was too hot and tired to answer. Instead, I waved my room key in the air like a magic wand.

I just wanted to shower and sleep, but Teresa reminded me that we needed to pick up our train tickets from the concierge. Samii was gone, but another happy fellow filled his seat. I introduced myself and asked whether our tickets were ready.

The concierge frowned. “The night trains to Luxor are full. Every night till July. Ramadan.”

We were devastated, and so was the concierge.

“What about day trains?” I asked. “Can we travel by day?”

“No, no day trains, not for you, not for foreigners.”

I asked why we couldn’t travel by train during the day, but the concierge insisted he did not know. He suggested we try Watania, but I shook my head.

“You could fly to Luxor,” he suggested. “It’s forty-five minutes and very comfortable for you.”

The concierge was right, of course. The flight would be quick and affordable. That morning, we had found same-day flights listed at sixty-two dollars each, one-way. It was a fair price, but we wanted to see Egypt, by road, and by day. We would fly if we had to, but not willingly. I thanked the concierge, and he returned our train fare.

On the elevator ride upstairs, I remembered seeing a sign, the day before, for Go Bus, a Turkish bus company. They had a large office, around the corner from the shopping center. We dropped our groceries in our room, washed the smog and sweat from our faces, and went for a walk. Traffic was horrible, but we rushed across the road without hesitation: tuck, dodge, and tuck again. We sidestepped garbage and excrement and ignored the cries of a thousand taxi drivers (TAX…!) till we found the ticket agency, on the ground floor of a commercial building a few blocks away. The lobby was dark and hot and humid. The air reeked of diesel exhaust and ammonia, and cat feces littered the floor. The Go Bus office looked abandoned. Its lights were off and the door closed. There was nobody inside. We left, empty-handed, and walked back to the hotel. I cursed life in Cairo all the way.

That night, we scoured the Internet for information about trains in Egypt. The Egyptian National Railways offered a thorough English version of its website. It listed dates, times, and fares. I tried to buy tickets, but the website refused my transaction time and time again. Most other websites we read were outdated or vague or both. Several websites suggested we board a train in Cairo and buy tickets from the conductor. The conductors don’t care, the writers claimed, but Teresa cringed at the idea of being put off in some town along the way. We searched on-line for bus routes to Luxor and found more conflicting information. Several travelers reported being dropped on the side of the road, miles from town. They were met by unlicensed taxis who charged obscene fares. Still, it was our best option for ground travel. We found listings for a few bus companies that traveled between Cairo and Luxor, but only one (Go Bus) had a working website. They couldn’t, or wouldn’t, let us buy tickets on-line either. Teresa scoured our guidebook for information. They, too, recommended that we fly to Luxor. Teresa drifted to sleep before we settled on a plan, and I closed my laptop shortly thereafter. Luxor would have to wait.





Cairo Underground





The next morning, we dragged our bags to the lobby, and the clerk asked about our stay. She wanted to know if we were comfortable, and she wondered whether we enjoyed the museum. This time, there were no missing candy bars, no mysteries to solve, and nothing to joke about. The clerk did offer to call a car for us, but we had nowhere to go. We couldn’t get to Luxor, and we didn’t want to stay in Cairo. “No, thank you,” I said.

We stood outside, in the driveway, and stared at the ground. It was already ninety-five degrees. Our backpacks pinched our shoulders, our clothes clung to our bodies, and we were stranded in Cairo. Teresa didn’t mind. “That’s your problem,” she said. Teresa was ready to fly to Luxor, but I hated the idea. So Teresa told me to figure it out; she just wanted breakfast. We dragged our bags across the street to the shopping center and sat down in the lobby, near the café. We had the place to ourselves, but somehow the room still smelled of tar and nicotine. Teresa ordered a coffee and croissant and read for awhile. I suggested we stay another night or two around Cairo. “There’s so much to see and do here,” I said, but, just like that afternoon in Lisbon, Teresa never looked at me, not once.

I opened my laptop and reserved a room at Novotel El Borg, a “mid-scale hotel” near Cairo Tower. Their website promised free Wi-Fi and a rooftop restaurant. Best of all, the hotel was just over the river, about half a mile from the Hilton. Teresa nodded in agreement. The hotel sounded fine for a couple days, but she didn’t want to walk there. She was hot, and our bags – overstuffed with groceries for our aborted trip to Luxor – were heavy. Teresa finished her coffee and croissant and followed me to the curb. I tried to hail a taxi, but none would stop. Egyptian taxi drivers are fickle. One day they’ll follow you around town like puppies (TAX…!), the next day they’ll pass by you in a cloud of dust. I suppose there’s a method to their madness, but we never figured it out. When a driver finally did stop for us that afternoon, it was all for naught. He slammed on his brakes and stopped fifty feet down the block. We had to jog after him. “Where go?” he asked. “Novotel El Borg, on Gezirah,” I answered. The driver cursed me and pointed through his windshield. The hotel’s logo glowed like a sapphire on the far side of the river. The driver sped away, and Teresa laughed. “OK, we’ll walk,” she said.

We crossed the Nile. The river was dark and lazy and choked with trash. It had all the romance of a sewer. Fifteen minutes later, we found the hotel entrance. It was well hidden at the bottom of a steep driveway, around a corner, and behind a grove of bushes. The hotel looked fine, but it lacked the fanfare or security of Mena House and the Hilton. Those hotels had heavy steel gates and bomb-sniffing dogs. The Novotel had two traffic cones, and they were small. A security guard smiled and pointed at his X-ray machine. I’m sure he was an absolute gentleman, but if terrorists attacked the hotel, which happens all too often, he would offer little deterrence. The desk clerk was very busy. He handled several calls while he sorted our reservation and passports. He was fluent in Arabic, English, French, and German, he proudly announced to us in Arabic, English, French, and German. He directed us to the elevator and explained the building’s unusual layout. The hotel lobby was on the ground floor, and the next few floors housed private office space, so even though our room was on the fourth floor of the hotel, it was actually on the eighth floor of the building. Our room had a great view of the Cairo Tower and its loudspeakers.

My plan that day was simple: go to Ramses Railway Station, the largest train station in Cairo, and buy tickets to Luxor. If we had any trouble, we would walk to the central bus station, about a mile from Ramses Station, and buy bus tickets to Luxor. We had a map and our Lonely Planet Egypt to guide the way. I suggested we ride the subway from Opera House Station, a short walk from the hotel, to Ramses Station, about two miles away. Teresa worried about riding the subway in Cairo. She had read warnings about sexual harassment and violence on mass transit in Egypt, and foreign women were frequent targets. She agreed to try but made no promises.

The Cairo Metro system opened in 1987. At the time, it served a handful of stations, but, since then, two other lines have opened, and a fourth and fifth are planned. The system now handles about four million passengers a day, almost as many as Tokyo. The subway lines are numbered (1, 2, and 3 so far) and some signs and maps include a color designation as well (blue, red, and green) though few maps agrees on the color scheme. Our route from Novotel to Ramses Station would follow Line 2, which spans twenty stations from El Mounib, in Giza, to Shubra El Kheima, in Cairo. The line opened in 1997, with extensions since then, and cost 761 million euro to build. I read that the project was funded, in large part, by a loan from France, and I wondered whether Egypt learned anything from its experience with the Suez Canal. Apparently not.

Opera House Station is around the corner from Novotel. The entrance was marked with a tall pole capped with a red M. We found a row of ticket windows on the mezzanine level, and though the station was busy, there were no lines. Our guidebook told us that the fare would be one pound each, and, for once, I had exact change. I tucked the coins into the slot under a ticket window and said, “Ramses Station.” The agent ignored me. Meanwhile, several other passengers rushed the window. They tucked coins and notes into the slot under the window, and the agent exchanged their money for tickets. He said something to me, but I had no idea what. He repeated the phrase several times, but I was baffled.

“Do you need any help?” A man stood at my side. He was in his seventies, carried a worn briefcase, and wore a dark suit, two sizes too large. He, too, tucked a note through the slot under the ticket window and bought a ticket. The helpful passenger said something to the ticket agent, and the agent finally took my money and surrendered two tickets to me.

“Yes, please. We are going to Ramses Station.”

“Yes, of course. Al Shohadaa” he replied.

“No, Ramses Station, the train station.”

“Yes, I know it. Al Shohadaa, Martyrs’ Square. The ticket agent tried to tell you, but you did not understand.”

The helpful passenger waved for us to follow him. He led us around the corner to a long row of turnstiles. The turnstiles had modern, electronic ticket readers, but they no longer worked. Instead, several young men monitored the turnstiles and watched for scofflaws. We dropped our tickets in a basket on top of a turnstile and followed our leader down another set of stairs. He pointed to one side and said, “Al Shohadaa. Trains.” Then he disappeared into the crowd.

We descended another flight of stairs to our platform. Hot air blew in our faces and steel wheels screeched against steel rails. We had just missed a train. Hordes of men and women rushed past us. They pushed and shoved and elbowed and grabbed at each other on their way up to the street. The platform was ours, and ours alone, if only for a moment. We used the solitude to explore the platform. Teresa pointed to the ceiling. Several clocks hung from the rafters like upside-down lollipops. They were the first analog clocks we had seen in Egypt, and their faces were painted with Eastern Arabic numbers. The characters were familiar, but unreadable. (We use Western Arabic numbers in the United States and Western Europe.) Teresa flipped through our guidebook, found a glossary of Arabic phrases, and practiced her language skills. “Wahid, ithnan, thalaatha… it’s thalaatha o’clock,” she said. While Teresa studied the glossary, I inspected a sign on the wall. It listed the subway station names in English and Arabic, and I noticed something odd. One name was scribbled out, and another name hand-painted over it. I suddenly realized what that friendly passenger meant. Ramses was the name of the train station, not the subway station. To get to Ramses, we would have to get out at Al Shohadaa. (The subway station was called Mubarak until 2011, when it was renamed. Al Shohadaa, or Martyrs’ Square, honors those who died in the recent revolution.)

A train passed on the opposite platform, then another, but nothing headed in our direction. Meanwhile, hundreds of passengers flooded the platform. Soon, we were elbow to elbow and a dozen deep. The crowd was so dense that we couldn’t leave if we wanted to. Teresa glared at me, and I knew why. We were surrounded by men, and only men. There had been a few women on the platform earlier, but they were lost in the crowd. I looked for them and noticed a sign overhead. It was lettered in English and Arabic and had an outline of a woman in a dress: Ladies. The trains were segregated by gender. Women can ride in any car, but the two middle cars on every train are reserved for women only. I asked Teresa if she wanted to ride in the women’s car, but she felt safer traveling with me, despite the wall of men around us. A moment later, overhead speakers and lights roared to life, and a train entered the station. The doors opened, a few passengers stepped off, but the cars were packed with more sweaty men. Somehow, dozens more men squeezed aboard. Thirty minutes and four trains later, we found a car with room to board. We ducked under arms and twisted around elbows, and fought our way on.

In Cairo, the subway cars have no air-conditioning, or, if they do, it doesn’t work. The air on our train got very warm, very quickly. I spied a few narrow windows, above the seats. They were open, but the draft was warm and dirty. The odor on the car was overwhelming. I noticed one man in particular. He was quite a bit shorter than the other passengers, and his nose landed squarely in the armpit of a very sweaty man. As the train swayed back and forth, the taller man’s armpit wiped across the shorter man’s face like a pendulum of torture.

The train accelerated as we crossed under the Nile, but slowed again near Sadat Station. Sadat had been a major stop, within easy reach of the Egyptian Museum and the bus station at Midan Abdel Moneim Riad. Then came the revolution, and thousands of protestors traveled through Sadat on their way to the demonstrations at Tahrir. In response, the government closed the station. The platforms are still there, and the lights were on, but the station looked like a ghost town. When we were safely past the station, the train accelerated again.

I felt a tug on my shoulder. A man was trying to get my attention. He stood in the vestibule of the door and wanted to make room for Teresa and me. It was a tight maneuver, but we shuffled around the other passengers. Soon, Teresa was safely tucked in the vestibule and I stood in front of her, shielding her from the wall of men around us. I heard her whisper and tilted my head to listen. She asked why everyone was staring at her. “They aren’t,” I said. (They were, but I lied to comfort her.) I looked around, and being taller than most everyone there, had a clear view of the car. I counted two other women, each wore a hijab. Teresa was dressed conservatively, with a loose blouse, light sweater, and a scarf, but she was clearly not Egyptian. She felt like a target, and I felt terrible.

The train slowed as we neared Mohamed Naguib Station, and I noticed passengers lean, en masse, toward the doors. When the doors opened, a battle erupted. Dozens of men forced their way onto the train while dozens more forced their way off. The competing bodies formed rival walls of human flesh. The car rocked side to side. Fists flew and cheeks were crushed. Suddenly the lines broke, but for every passenger who got off the train, two more got on.

The train was packed, and we had two more stops to go. Teresa was trapped behind me in the vestibule, unable to see past my shoulders. She tugged on my elbow. “I want to get off the train now,” she said. I agreed, but, in reality, I couldn’t imagine how we would ever get off the train together. The train slowed as we approached Attaba Station. We didn’t stand a chance. The platform was busier than any I had ever seen, including Rockefeller Center on Christmas Eve. Teresa grabbed my shirt, but there was nowhere to go.

A young man looked up at me. He stood in the center of the car, surrounded by a group of his friends. “You go?” he asked. I nodded, and he shouted to his friends. Several of the young men grabbed me by the waist, shoulders, and elbows. The train stopped and the doors opened. The passengers on the platform were locked arm in arm, their heads tucked down. It was a scrum, and I was the ball. With all their might, my teammates launched me into the offensive line of the oncoming crowd. Teresa held on to my belt. Bodies pushed at me from all sides, and I could feel my skin pulling tight. Someone stood on my foot, an elbow jabbed my ribs. Then I popped through the crowd and landed safely on the platform, Teresa was right behind me. I turned around and saw my teammates on the train. We laughed and waved to each other.

Teresa and I wedged ourselves through the crowded platform, up the stairs, and into the middle of busy bazaar. Vendors and carts and horses and shoppers filled the street in every direction. Some vendors sold clothing, others sold housewares, and others pushed wooden carts loaded with bread and melons. We found a hollow between two stalls and checked our map and guidebook. Neither had much to say about the square or the marketplace. In fact, we were only a mile from Ramses Station and Al Shohadaa, but we didn’t know that.

Teresa grumbled something about airports and planes. We should have flown to Luxor, she grunted. We should have stayed on that train, I snorted. We were hot and lost and needed to leave the square before our tiff turned worse. I noticed a side street that looked a little less chaotic than the others and we started walking. The road was short, and the sidewalk, as always, littered with trash and feces. We walked in the middle of the road, around moving cars and trucks. Soon, that little road dropped us in the middle of a busy thoroughfare unlike any we had seen in Cairo. The road was lined with mid-rise apartment buildings. Women draped laundry on the balconies, and children played in the street. Narrow storefronts filled the ground floor of most buildings. The storefronts spilled over the sidewalk. Gadgets and widgets and industrial doodads blocked our way. We stepped around boxes of bolts, pulleys, gaskets, and fittings piled high and proud. Everything was made of heavy metal and twisted wire. It felt like we landed in a warehouse full of Terminator parts. I couldn’t even identify most of the merchandise – it seemed highly specific – but the stores were packed with customers. Drivers double-parked, bumper-to-bumper. They popped their trunks and loaded and unloaded the mechanical goods. I wanted to window-shop but Teresa was in a hurry.

I spotted a taxi driver on the next corner. He sat on the hood of his rusted, white sedan. The doors were open and his radio spilled music into the air. I told the driver that we needed a ride to the train station and we haggled on the price. It was far, he swore to me, and might cost a hundred pounds. A teenage boy interrupted the deal.

“No, no tax. You go,” he said. He pointed down the road, the way we had been walking.

“Ramses Station? Al Shohadaa?” I asked.

“Yes, you go.”

The boy patted me on the shoulder and pointed again. Smoke from his cigarette burned my eyes, and I choked as I thanked him for his help. As we walked away, I heard him and the taxi driver argue. That boy cost the driver a fare, and the driver was very unhappy.

The road twisted and turned around a wide intersection, and still there was no sign of a train station. We thought we were lost for good until an elderly woman stopped and looked up at us. She was short and squat and smiled when she saw us. “Hello,” she shouted up to us. I explained that we were looking for Ramses Station, and Teresa offered the map to her, just in case. The woman smiled and pulled a pair of reading glasses from her bag. She paused to think, and said “End of street.” Her English was stilted like she knew the words but hadn’t used them in a very long time. She was right, though. The road ended in a jungle of highway ramps and bridges, and on the far side of that mess stood Ramses Station. A pedestrian bridge carried us over the traffic. Trash covered the stairs, and wide cracks in the concrete revealed the streets below. Twisted and rusted rebar jutted straight up and threatened tetanus with every step. The bridge lifted us high over the city and we could see for blocks in every direction. Dozens of white microbuses filled the adjacent parking lots and curbs. Grocers stacked coolers and crates in front of their shops. I stopped to photograph the scene, but Teresa told me to hurry.

Concrete barriers capped with chain link fencing encircled the station and its grounds. Cars and buses parked three deep at the curb, and a narrow gate allowed entry. We followed the crowd through the gate and across the parking lots to the entrance. A battalion of very serious police officers and soldiers guarded the building. They searched luggage and scanned bags with a string of X-ray machines. The crowd was thick, but moved quickly. We didn’t have bags with us so the guards waved us through the checkpoint. Inside, we found a grand concourse decorated in brass and blue and white and gold. Shops and restaurants and offices lined the walls on all three floors. The destination board listed cities and times and platforms. We couldn’t read the words, but we had fun imagining the destinations.

We circled the concourse and searched for the information office. After some time, we found the room, right where it belonged: under a sign that read Info. We stood at the counter and waited and waited. From that vantage point, we could see straight into the office where three men leaned back in their chairs and put their feet up on the desk. They ignored us with all their might, till we surrendered and left. Teresa found a pair of ticket vending machines and poked at them for a minute. The machines offered information in Arabic, French, and English. Teresa tried, and tried again, to select English, but the button never responded. Then she selected French, and the machine came to life. She selected our destination et la date, and the machine returned a list of horaires et les prix. But there was no option to buy a billet. While we cursed the machines, a police officer marched toward us. He said something to me, in Arabic. I had no idea what he said, so I told him, in English, that we wanted two first-class tickets to Luxor for that Thursday. The officer answered me, in Arabic. His was a long and discouraging sentence of which I only understood one phrase: al Uqṣur. I sighed, he sighed, and we stared at each other for a moment. Then he attacked the ticket vending machine with his thick forefinger. I watched the screen flip and flop. Lines of Arabic glowed and rolled across the screen from right to left. The officer drew his finger under one of the lines. I don’t know what it said, but it looked important. Unable to convey his point, the officer led us back to the concourse and called over to a few people. He wanted to find someone, anyone, who spoke English. Everyone was in a hurry, and nobody stopped to help. So he led us back to the information office. He shouted at a man behind the desk, and that man shouted at me.

“No train for you. Only sleeper. No chair. Only sleeper.”

“Please,” I said, “two tickets for a train to Luxor, day or night is fine.”

The man looked at his friends and screamed for a solid minute.

“Why can’t we ride the train?” I demanded to know.

The fellow got angry. He lowered his feet to the floor, leaned forward, and repeated himself, word for word, very slowly.

“No train for you. Only sleeper. No chair. Only sleeper.”

There would be no trains for us, but he wouldn’t, or couldn’t, say why not. That part of our quest was over, but, on our way into the station, Teresa had spotted a couple signs for bus companies on the wall. The signs pointed outside. First we found a Go Bus office. It was the same company we tried to visit the day before, in that fetid building near the Hilton. The Go Bus agency at Ramses Station was a grand improvement over their downtown office. The air was cool and quiet and the room was empty except for the ticket agent. She was a petite, young woman who spoke only a few phrases in English, but she understood what we wanted. She pointed to a printed list of schedules and prices. It showed two buses a day from Cairo to Luxor, but they each traveled by night. Teresa was willing to try a bus, but only by day. We thanked the agent and left empty-handed.

A teenage boy waited for us in front of the Go Bus office.

“Where you go? We have bus to Luxor.”

The boy led us next door, through an arcade and into the crowded and smoke-filled office of Harmony Jet. The room was packed with men, women, and children. Coolers lined the far wall. They were filled with snacks and drinks for sale. The boy introduced us to the ticket agent. He was about fifty years old and petite and wiry. A cigarette dangled from his lower lip while he spoke.

“Yes, hello. Welcome. You’re going to Luxor?”

The agent spoke perfect English, with a hint of American accent I thought. I imagined that he had lived abroad for many years, maybe in New York. I explained our predicament to him. “No problem,” he said. He told us that Harmony Jet had a daily bus to Luxor, and it left at noon.

“And what time does the bus arrive?” I asked.

“It is seven hours, my friend. An easy trip, even for you. Our buses have air-conditioning and the seats recline, like an airplane. Super fast.”

Teresa asked whether there were any stops on the way. The State Department warned travelers to avoid Asyut and Sohag.

“No, my friend. No stops, express! And one rest stop, later on.”

Teresa asked about the rest stop. She wanted to know whether it was on the highway or in a town.

“My friend, no, it is in a camp, like a Bedouin camp.”

I imagined a roadside café, set among dunes, with tents pitched around an oasis. It sounded too good to be true.

“What about smoking?”

“No smoking. Only the driver smokes, because it is a long ride.”

“OK,” I said, “may we have two tickets for the Thursday bus?”

The agent needed copies of our passports, which we had with us, and payment in cash only. He flipped through a folder and tempted us with hotels and restaurants, but we just wanted the bus tickets.

“OK, here you go. My name is Hamady. Nice to meet you. I will see you here, on Thursday. Look for me in the office.”

We finally had two tickets to Luxor, and, once again, Teresa was thrilled. I wanted to share her enthusiasm, but I couldn’t. I felt guilty. I knew that if I weren’t so stubborn, we could have flown to Luxor any day of the week, or we could have traveled by tourist train. Teresa might have been more comfortable, and it certainly might have saved us a lot of trouble. But I was stubborn, and that made our trip that much more difficult. As an act of contrition, I told Teresa that we could do whatever she wanted for the rest of the day. She smiled and flipped through the guidebook for ideas.

“There’s a market,” she said. “Khan al-Khalili. It’s an ancient souq near the Islamic quarter. Maybe we can find a café and get lunch. I want tea. Do you want tea? No, of course you don’t.”

She was right, I never want tea, but that didn’t matter. I noticed an empty taxi parked on the sidewalk across the street, and told Teresa to wait for me while I negotiated the fare.

“Hello,” I said. “Khan al-Khalili, please. How much?”

The driver didn’t hesitate. “One hundred dollars.”

“Sorry?” I was shocked. The trip should have cost a few dollars.

“Fifty dollars?”

Either the driver was bad at English, or he was bad at negotiating, I couldn’t tell. I thanked him and retreated across the street.

“What happened?” Teresa asked.

“It was expensive, let’s go there some other time,” I said.

Teresa had another idea. She wanted to go back to Giza, to tour Dokki, a neighborhood on the left bank of the Nile. Our guidebook recommended a few restaurants and said the streets were lined with embassies and shops.

“We could take the train to Cairo University and walk back to the hotel from there,” Teresa said.

I was flabbergasted. “I thought you hated the subway?”

“It wasn’t so bad after all,” she answered.

“OK. Maybe. How far is it from the university to the hotel?”

“It doesn’t look far, maybe a couple miles,” Teresa answered.

We descended, once more, below ground, to the subway. This time, the train came right away and, though it was crowded, we found refuge in the vestibule again. Another passenger stood up, waved to us, pointed at his seat, and then at Teresa. She didn’t want the man’s seat, but I told her that she had to accept. “This is Egypt,” I said. “Don’t insult his gender-role expectations.” Teresa rolled her eyes at my social science gibberish, but accepted the seat after all. As soon as she sat down, the man next to her groaned and stood up. “His religious doctrine prohibited him from sitting next to a woman to whom he is not related,” I said. “You probably violated his gender-role expectations, too.” Teresa ignored me.

The train was quieter and the air cooler than it had been earlier that day. At first, our car was packed, but dozens of passengers disembarked at every station. By the time we got out, there were only a few other passengers in our car. Cairo University station was above ground, on a causeway with an open-air platform, so we stopped to get our bearings. Teresa thought she could see the pyramids in the distance, but it was just a layer of smog. A staircase carried us down to the street where we expected to find the university. Teresa hoped to find a bookstore or café where we could read and relax for a long while, but if there were a bookstore or café, we never found it. Instead, we found a security wall that encircled the campus like a Supermax prison. The gate was guarded by a police officer who he took his job very seriously. He blocked our path and scolded us, in Arabic, for a long list of crimes including, I presume, trespass and bad posture. Three men sat at a table nearby. I don’t know who they were, but, when the police officer raised his voice to us, one of the men rushed to our defense. He tried to calm the officer, but the officer shook him off. Teresa held up our Lonely Planet Egypt to prove our innocence.

“Travelers? You are here to visit the campus?” the man asked.

Teresa told him that we had traveled a long way, and wanted to tour the grounds. The man apologized profusely, but visitors were not allowed without an invitation. He shook my hand and wished us well on our travels, but no, we could not enter.

Cairo University is one of the largest in the world, so we expected it would be something like Harvard University or Trinity College Dublin, where students and faculty and visitors live and work year-round. But the streets around the campus were lonely and quiet. There were few cars and no pedestrians at all. There was no obvious student housing, no shops, and no cafes like we expected to find near a major university. The only person we passed was a barefoot street vendor. He wore a long, grey djellaba and sat on the ground in the shade of low-hanging tree. His inventory of used textbooks spilled across the sidewalk and lined the curb. Most of the titles were Arabic, though a few were French or English. All of the books were old and their covers faded. The vendor’s stock was little more than a potter’s field for the printed word. We slowed to inspect the display, but nothing caught our eye. I’m not sure whether the hapless merchant even noticed us. He never moved.

A mile down the road, we reached a broad intersection jammed with cars and pedestrians. This was the heart of Dokki, one of the wealthiest neighborhoods in greater Cairo. The area had long been farmland, but a wealthy British family bought the fields and developed the neighborhood throughout the 1920s and 30s. Today, Dokki is home to Egypt’s modern-day aristocracy as well as thousands of university students. Dozens of embassies occupy regal estates and expensive apartments here. Many residents live in high-rise buildings with sweeping views of the Nile, and, on a clear day, the pyramids.

The main thoroughfare – aptly named Al Dokki – is a vibrant carnival of traffic and noise and shopping and eating. It was everything we hoped to find around the university, but didn’t. Cafes and shops lined the road and pedestrians jammed the sidewalks. One storefront was busier than all the others: Semsema. The crowd at Semsema spilled out of the restaurant, over the sidewalk, and into the road. The little take-out place sold shawarma, and they sold a lot of it. Two chefs, each dressed in a white coat and hat, manned the spits out front. One chef prepared and sliced beef, the other chicken. They filled a dozen orders every minute, and still the crowd never thinned. Inside, customers swamped the clerk with orders. They shouted and they jostled and they waved wads of cash. Somehow, the clerk knew who ordered what. He ran his fingers across the register with lightning speed. He took cash with one hand and returned change and receipts with the other. Rivers of hungry customers rushed outside and exchanged their receipts for bags of shawarma. My mouth watered and Teresa’s belly rumbled. I wanted to order something – anything – but I couldn’t get near the register.

“Hello, would you like a menu?” A man waved to us from behind the counter. He was an older fellow, with a balding head and plump belly, dressed in slacks and a button-up shirt. He was the manager, he said with a bright smile. The menu – printed in English and Arabic – listed dozens of options, all of which sounded wonderful. In the end, we settled on a traditional beef shawarma with tahini sauce and two drinks. The manager took our money and shouted the order to the cashier. Nobody else seemed to notice that we received preferential treatment, or, if they did, nobody complained to us.

We rejoined the mob outside, and I thrust our receipt in the air. The chef grabbed it and impaled it on a spike filled with hundreds of other receipts. He sliced delicate strips of meat from the skewer of beef and roasted them on a grill. While the meat sizzled on the flattop, the chef slit a roll and layered it with tahini sauce and tomato slices. In those few seconds, the strips of beef seared to perfection. The chef folded the meat onto the dressed bun and wrapped the sandwich in paper. He handed the sandwich to me with one hand and took another customer’s receipt with the other. Meanwhile, a delivery boy – he must have been around twelve years old – launched his scooter over the curb and onto the sidewalk. He rolled through the crowd, grabbed a bag of sandwiches from the chef, honked his horn a few times, and sped off to make his next delivery. The crowd barely moved as he drove down the sidewalk.

Food in hand, we took refuge on a corner, about a block away. I split the sandwich in two, and warm tahini sauce dribbled down my arm. The bread was hot and soft. The tomato slices were thick and dark red. The meat was crisp and tender and moist and hot – but not too hot. I swallowed my half of the sandwich in a few quick bites. Teresa’s food didn’t last much longer. We chased our meal with swigs of ice-cold orange Fanta and debated whether to go back for more. But we were too late. In those last few minutes, the line had morphed from a frenzied crowd to a ravenous mob, and the dinner rush would last for several hours.

We found our next meal, a few minutes later, at a curbside restaurant near a busy intersection. The restaurant needed neither sign nor advertisement. Plumes of soft, white smoke called to us from a block away. The unmistakable scent of charcoal and flame and barbecued meat invited us to sit and stay awhile. I suppose we could have sat inside, but then we would have missed the action. Instead, the host suggested a curbside table, and by curbside, I mean that our table was in the street, between the curb and several lanes of traffic. Teresa faced the street while I took the less propitious seat with my back to the wind. I took comfort in the fact that if death came, it would come quickly.

I don’t know whether the restaurant had a set menu, or even a name. The host, an older fellow in a bright yellow, button-up shirt, simply asked what we wanted, and, for once, the choice was rather obvious. In the street, a dozen feet away, two cooks prepared the evening’s specialty: grilled meat. One cook marinated and skewered fillets of chicken and lamb and beef. The other cook hovered over an eight-foot-long barbecue pit filled with hundreds more skewers. Hot coals spit fire and smoke a hundred feet in the air.

“What do you like?” The host asked.

“Chicken, please?” I answered with undue trepidation.

“Large or small?”

“Small, please.”

The host returned with two bottles of water – which we didn’t order, but desperately wanted – and a parade of dishes. First, he delivered a salad of sliced cucumbers and tomatoes dressed in oil and spices. Then he brought a large bowl of hummus. It was thick and nutty, almost like peanut butter. Our chicken arrived next. Its flesh was burned to a perfect crisp. The charred skin flaked off to reveal moist, tender meat. Finally, the host delivered a plate of fresh pita. It was steaming hot and fat and round like a football. The chicken was far too spicy for either of us, but it was also so good that we ate most of it anyway. We raised our drinks and toasted the host and the cooks. A stray cat curled up on the ground under my chair. It had no interest in the chicken, it just wanted a friend. The cat purred itself to sleep while I paid the check.

We followed El Tahrir back to Gezirah. The bridge was busy with young fishermen. They cast their lines in the water and gossiped with each other, but I don’t think they caught any fish that day. The sun was just about to set when we got back to our hotel. Rays of pink and gold light filled the room. Teresa looked out the window and swore, once again, that she could see the pyramids off in the distance. “I see them, too,” I said. It was just smog, but Teresa didn’t need to know that.

That night, we lay in bed and read our guidebook and checked our email and drifted to sleep. Hours later, music and cheers filled my head with a pleasant dream, but it wasn’t a dream at all. I sat upright and looked around. The room was dark, but I saw Teresa’s silhouette by the open window. The noise was coming from outside. In the parking lot, eight stories down, two dozen men, women, and children formed a ring around a dancer. The dancer wore an elaborate robe of red cloth with gold stripes. He whirled on his toes, in a tight circle. He spun and spun faster. With each revolution he raised his arms higher and higher. He raised a long sword over his head and waved it up and down in the air. He aimed his sword at everyone and no one. He whirled faster and faster. His robe caught the breeze and stretched out from him like a fan. The music grew louder and the tempo raced. Someone in the crowd set off fireworks and the sparkling lights danced in the air, just outside our window. Teresa oohed and aahed. When we looked back to the parking lot, the dance was over. The audience applauded (so did Teresa) and followed the dancer back into the hotel. The next morning, we asked the front desk clerk about the party. “It was probably zaffa,” he said. The song and dance precedes a wedding party, he told us, and the hotel hosted weddings almost every night of the year. Teresa repeated the word, “zaffa.” She loved the whole affair, and she loved Egypt, if only for the moment.





A Walk in the Park





It was Wednesday, our last full day in Cairo, and Teresa had a plan: walk to Coptic Cairo, by way of the Nile, with tours of Garden City and Rhoda Island along the way. If all went well, we would picnic in a park on the river and tour ancient churches all afternoon. The four-mile hike across town would take all day so we packed a bag with supplies: apples liberated from the breakfast buffet, map from the Hilton, Lonely Planet Egypt from AUC, and bottles of water from a nearby street vendor. I rummaged through my backpack for a clean T-shirt and coated myself in sunscreen. Teresa draped a scarf around her head and topped it with an oversized sun hat. Wherever we went that day, we would stand out like the sorest of thumbs, but Teresa didn’t care. “Let’s go,” she said.

Traffic choked El Tahrir and blocked Opera Square. Sirens roared in the near distance, just out of sight, and drivers honked their horns with both hands. We stumbled between fenders and hoods, but the drivers were more aggressive than usual. A bumper caught my knee and I limped across the road. Teresa waited for me in the shade of a monumental lion perched on a pedestal at the gate to Qasr al-Nil Bridge. Sirens and horns and motors filled the air with their noxious symphony of noise pollution. Police cars, fire engines, and ambulances inched through the stalled traffic. A column of armored vehicles rolled toward the bridge. The convoy spit clouds of black smoke in the air. Their monstrous engines bellowed with the power of a thousand horses, and the bridge shook under the weight of a thousand-ton convoy. Armored vehicles were stationed all over the city, but we had never seen one – let alone a convoy – on the road before. “Something must have happened,” I said, but Teresa didn’t listen. “No time to dawdle,” she said. The police cars and fire engines and ambulances and armored vehicles crawled over the bridge and disappeared into the city.

We crossed the bridge and turned south along the Corniche. Garden City filled the skyline to our left, on the far side of the Corniche. The district looks much like Victorian London and fin de siècle Paris, which, given its heritage, was unsurprising. The land that would become Garden City abuts the Nile, and the neighboring sand dunes and swampland attracted few residents until the nineteenth century. Cairo was then a much smaller city centered a mile to the east, around the old Citadel, but the city was growing and modernizing. In 1905, the Nile Land & Agricultural Company, which owned much of the riverfront property, hired José Lamba, an Italian engineer and architect, to design a new residential and commercial district. Lamba filled the neighborhood with villas and gardens and squares and circles and all those things that would appeal to the European investors who would soon occupy Garden City. Our guidebook recommended a tour of the neighborhood, but we couldn’t get across the road. Cars and trucks and buses chased each other along the Corniche, bumper-to-bumper, at about ten miles an hour. Traffic moved just fast enough that we never found safe crossing. Teresa huffed and pouted, but there was nothing we could do. Defeated, we turned our backs on Garden City and marched on to Rhoda.

Our guidebook didn’t have much to say about the island. The highlight seemed to be something called the nilometer. Built in the ninth century, the nilometer is a long marble column suspended from a wood crossbeam inside a secure tower on the river’s edge. Ancient hydrologists used the device to measure the river’s depth and flow, information that was considered sacred and secret. The tower’s design was certainly ingenious, but over the centuries, the nilometer has been modified and updated, so it’s not much to see. At least, that’s what Lonely Planet said. Our guidebook also mentioned acres of riverfront “plant nurseries,” and that’s where Teresa hoped to break for our picnic lunch. She also hoped to find a quiet corner where she could dip her toes in the river. Teresa seemed to forget about the industrial waste and waterborne diseases that lurk in the water, but I didn’t say anything. Denial ain’t just a river in Africa, or so the saying goes.

Its water may be unsanitary, but the Nile is certainly scenic. So we weren’t surprised to find a luxurious hotel on the waterfront, just over the bridge from Garden City. The Hotel Meridien Cairo, as it was first known, opened in 1971. The hotel catered to an international and business-class clientele, many of whom traveled on expense accounts. Those clients undoubtedly enjoyed the hotel’s central location, deluxe rooms, and full-service bar. The Meridien changed hands in 2003, and the new owners had big plans for the property. They rebranded the hotel, added a forty-one-story tower, and, in a moment of piety, ordered the staff to dump the hotel’s entire stock of alcohol down the drain. The Hyatt Corporation, which managed the hotel at the time, bit its corporate tongue, but many thirsty clients stayed elsewhere after that. Widespread labor strikes followed the 25 January Revolution, and just a few weeks later, Hyatt cancelled its management contract and walked away. The revolution and the labor strikes and the loss of management devastated the business, and the absentee landlords prepared to shutter the hotel till the new government intervened. On behalf of the employees, the Ministry of Tourism appealed to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, and the Council demanded that the hotel remain open. The move saved hundreds of jobs, all of which were badly needed. Now called the Grand Nile Tower Hotel, the mercurial property often sees more employees than customers, but not for want of trying.

The hotel grounds were beautiful and spotless and eerily quiet, like a cemetery after a funeral. We found a few cars parked in front of the hotel, and security guards, dressed in jet-black suits, patrolled the driveway. Guards and X-ray machines secured the entrance, but, once again, a police officer waved us around the checkpoint. The lobby was open and inviting and, again, eerily quiet. The ceiling soared fifty feet overhead and a glass wall offered a grand view of the Nile. Two bored clerks manned the front desk, and a waiter carried an empty tray across the vacant restaurant. The hotel was modern and massive and immaculate. It deserved long lines and busy restaurants, but there it sat, alone and lonely.

A sign posted in the lobby listed the hotel’s amenities, one of which was a shopping center. We hoped to find restrooms and a bank and thought the shopping center would offer one or the other, if not both. We found the shopping center on the far end of a long, dark corridor. Vacant storefronts lined several quiet floors around a central concourse. Elevators and escalators sat motionless and waited for shoppers that never come. The power was out, of course, and the only light was that of the sun reflected off the Nile and through another magnificent glass wall. We stopped to admire the view. There are seventeen million people in greater Cairo, yet we had that brand-new shopping center – and the view – to ourselves. We eventually found the bank, and the loo, on the far side of the mall. The bank was open, but the loo was closed. Teresa ran down a guard to unlock the door for her while I exchanged another wad of euro for pound. On our way out, I suggested we stop for a fruit cocktail in the bar, but Teresa was in a hurry.

We had, for the last few days, skirted along the Nile but never found a way in. We had crossed the bridges and walked along the Corniche, but that wasn’t enough for Teresa. She grew up on the west coast of Ireland, within a stone’s jump of the North Atlantic, and she loved nothing more than oceans and seas and rivers. If the Nile wouldn’t come to her, she would go to the Nile.

From the hotel, we followed a dusty back road along the river, but a stone wall, eight feet high, blocked our view of the water and the gardens. The road was busy, not with cars, but with dozens of pedestrians. We all walked in the street. We had to. Beautiful shade trees decorated the sidewalk, but thoughtless drivers parked cars and scooters between the trees. We tried to walk between the cars and the trees, but then we spied piles of human excrement and pools of urine here, there, and just about everywhere. We covered our noses to the stench and turned back to the road just in time. An elderly man lifted his robe, crouched, and shat in the shade on the sidewalk between two parked cars. Rhoda, it seemed, was anything but the verdant paradise Teresa hoped to find.

Further down the road, we found a gated arch set in the stone wall. The gate, closed and locked though it was, revealed a world far brighter than that shit-stained sidewalk behind us. There, behind the wall, and behind the gate, a garden unfolded on the banks of the river, and the river was blue and the garden was green. Teresa hurried down the road to find an entrance, and I limped along behind her. The next gate was wide-open, and, by the time I caught up to her, Teresa was in the garden, next to a small guardhouse. A sign listed the entry fees, in Eastern Arabic numbers, and Teresa practiced her elementary Arabic language skills. “Thalaatha. Three pounds, I think. I think the admission is three pounds,” she said. I bought two tickets, and Teresa was right: admission was thalaatha pounds each.

The garden was paradise found. Moments earlier, we had damned the stone wall for obstructing our view from the road, but the wall worked both ways. On the garden side of the wall, there were no cars or trucks or feces or urine. Instead, we found peace and quiet and clean air and acres of palms and ferns and hedges. A path wound through the park, and we soon found a spur that led toward the riverbank. Overhead, bouquets of yellow and blue flowers sprouted on canopies fifteen feet high. A bed of ferns ringed the trail. Their blood-red leaves looked like they had been dipped in Kool-Aid and left to dry in the sun. The path twisted and turned and forked around trees and grasses and bushes that we could never hope to identify. I saw something that looked like a bushy elm tree. It was covered in vines and the vines were covered in berries. The path turned sharply and followed a dense stand of reeds on the water’s edge. Teresa poked and prodded but there was no way to reach the river. Thwarted once again, we retreated to dry land.

We sat on a bench and relaxed in the shade of some glorious tree. Its leaves were small, greenish-black, and waxy, and, for some reason, I wondered what they tasted like. Rather than find out, I closed my eyes and nearly fell asleep. In that moment of half-dream, I thought I heard a familiar sound, but couldn’t place it. I forced my eyes open and looked left, right, up, and … down. There it was. A small, white cat, about a year old, sat between my feet and stared at me, and though I knew better, I reached down to pet him. The cat jumped onto the bench and buried his face in my leg. I wouldn’t say that he was dirty, but he certainly wasn’t clean. Every stroke issued a small cloud of grey dust. The cat loved the attention. He rolled on the bench and purred and licked his fur. I was just about to scratch under his chin – any cat’s favored spot – when something caught my eye. I saw a tiny black dot behind his ear, then another, and another. The spots moved. Fleas. I pulled my hand away and jumped from the bench. The poor animal didn’t understand. He cried and followed us across the garden.

A stone wall and musky restroom marked the southern terminus of our oasis. The wall worked just fine, but the restroom had neither electric lights nor running water so I couldn’t wash my hands. We never did step in the river or have our picnic, but it wasn’t our fault. The reeds kept us from the water and I didn’t dare eat after petting the stray cat, but we loved the garden nonetheless.

From the gardens, we marched south across the island. After a few blocks, the city closed in on us, like a canyon of concrete and glass, and we soon lost sight of the river. We tried to visit the nilometer, but we missed our turn and ended up on a bridge back to the mainland. Our guidebook told us that we had then entered Old Cairo, but, from where we stood, surrounded by exhaust and towering apartment blocks, Old Cairo looked just like regular Cairo and we hurried along.

A half-mile later, we stopped to rest in the shade of a young tree on the edge of a wide plaza. The plaza fronted a long, single-story building of sandstone and marble. Its façade was capped with a decorative row of merlons and crenellations. A minaret towered above the enclosure walls, and, like most minarets, this one wore a string of loudspeakers ready to broadcast the call to prayer. Teresa consulted our guidebook. “It’s the Mosque of Amr ibn al-‘As,” she read aloud. After hours of walking across Cairo, we had finally found a historic site: the oldest mosque in Africa. The original mosque was constructed in AD 642, of palm trunks, mud bricks, and thatched fronds, not long after Amr led his invasion across Egypt. That structure was razed and remodeled several times, and it was completely destroyed, in 1169, when Shawar, Egypt’s vizier, ordered all of Cairo burned to the ground to prevent its capture during the Crusades. The current mosque reportedly straddles the original building’s foundation, but with all the renovations and reconstruction and periods of desuetude, I questioned whether it’s fair to call this the oldest mosque in Africa. Teresa scowled. “The mosque is the congregation, not the building itself,” she argued. The mosque is open to the public, but we each felt underdressed for a proper visit. We settled instead on a peek through the gates before moving on.

The mosque seemed to mark an invisible boundary between commotion and calm. Traffic disappeared, and so, too, did the noise and the smog. A horse-drawn trailer rolled by. Its cargo of large, pressurized gas cylinders looked precarious, but the two young boys who drove the horse didn’t seem to mind. On the next corner we stopped to inspect a small shopping center called Souk El Fustat. The market, named for an ancient capital that once stood there, opened in 2001. In theory, the market featured handcrafted goods, manufactured on-site by local artisans. There would also be an ahwa (coffee shop) and cafeteria. But on our visit, the only things missing were the craftsmen and the tourists to buy from them. Many of the forty-seven storefronts were empty, most others were closed tight. We wandered the empty arcades and looked at empty display cases behind the dark windows. We weren't looking for souvenirs, but if the cafeteria had been open we might have stopped for lunch. It wasn’t, so we didn’t.

Across the road, storefronts advertised Coca Cola and Nestlé and T-shirts and bags. The shops were ready for busloads of tourists, but there would be no buses that day. Several merchants sat out front, on plastic chairs or on upturned crates, and waited. At least they had something to look at. Their shops traced one side of Sharia Mar Girgis opposite the walls of Coptic Cairo.

Our guidebook described, all too briefly, the deep ethnoreligious and historical background that illustrates Coptic Cairo’s raison d'être. We learned that Babylon, a Roman, and later Byzantine, fortress once stood there, on the banks of the Nile and alongside a canal that ran to the Red Sea. In that era, Cairo did not yet exist, but the fortress of Babylon and its adjacent harbor attracted laborers and their families. In time, a village developed inside and alongside that fortress, and the residents, including Christians and Jews, filled the growing settlement with important things like churches and synagogues. Then came Amr and his invading army, who, for several months, laid siege to the Byzantine garrison stationed at Babylon. Amr won the long battle, captured the fortress, and rolled across Egypt. When the invasion was complete, Amr returned to his tent, just outside the fortress, and established a camp there. His camp, al-Fustat, became the first Arab capital of Egypt. Cairo, built after yet another Arab invasion, came along three centuries later, a few miles north of al-Fustat and the fortress of Babylon. In one form or another, the village at Babylon survived the Arab invasions, as did Christianity and the churches that filled the old fortress. In time, Cairo engulfed the old settlements, so much of what we call Old Cairo and Coptic Cairo actually predates Cairo altogether. In fact, many of the sites in Coptic Cairo predate the foundation of Islam.

That latter fact reminded me of the perpetual and often violent tension between Copts (Christian) and Arabs (Muslim) all over Egypt. Sectarian violence could, and did, erupt almost anywhere the two groups met. Bombings, shootings, and riots have killed hundreds of Egyptians and foreigners in recent years, and the frequency of violent attacks surged after the 25 January Revolution. That tension rarely ebbs, and Coptic Cairo, being home to some of the oldest and most famous churches in the country, earned a permanent security detail. On our visit, a long swing gate stretched across Sharia Mar Girgis, between concrete barriers and a guardhouse. A dozen soldiers manned the gate. Some propped their automatic weapons on the ground, between their feet, but most draped their rifles over their shoulders. They all stared straight ahead, at us. Seeing neither signs nor friendly faces to point the way, we stood there, in the middle of the intersection, and waited. One of the soldiers – he was probably just a teenager – broke the silence.

“Where are you from?” he asked.

“America,” I answered.

“America? We love America!” the boy soldier shouted. His cry amused the other soldiers. They broke formation and laughed and patted the boy on his chest and shoulders. The boy turned red, but he laughed too. A police officer leaned out of the guardhouse, smiled, and waved us through the checkpoint.

We passed through the checkpoint like Lucy passed through the wardrobe. The shift was that immediate and profound, except, instead of Narnia and Aslan, we found Coptic Cairo and Saint George. This was a world of churches and crosses and priests. Missing were the mosques and minarets and muezzins that dominated most of the city’s skyline. On the far side of the checkpoint, a group of teenage girls and their chaperones trailed a priest down the road. The girls wore jeans and T-shirts, and they tied their hair in neat ponytails. The priest wore traditional vestments: an exorhason (long black robe), black ‘emma (round head cover), and a large, silver, pectoral cross that swung from a chain around his neck. His long, black beard was streaked with grey, and he held two cell phones, one in each hand. I supposed the group were on an ecclesiastical field trip, but the girls seemed more interested in gossip than God. Their chaperones would be busy that day.

An enclosure wall surrounds Coptic Cairo. Its bricks and mortar date back centuries, and much of the wall was patched, or in need of patching. We found an arched gate halfway down the road. A granite plaque announced, in Coptic, what lay beyond the gate. I recognized some of the lettering (it’s descended from Greek) and hoped to impress Teresa by translating the text. “It says ‘The archaic church of Egyptian Monk George,’” I announced proudly.

Teresa put a hand to her hip. “Really? It says it right there!” She pointed to a second, smaller plaque hung lower on the wall. That plaque, which listed the hours for Saint George Church, was inscribed in Arabic and English.

Teresa checked our guidebook and found a detailed map of the quarter. With a little help, she would prove to be a fair tour guide that day. She led us first to the Monastery of Saint George. “It’s a convent now,” she said. Teresa wanted to peek inside, but a custodian waved us away. Teresa didn’t mind. “This way,” she said. A paved path led us around the ancient district, just inside the enclosure walls. We next found a beautiful cemetery, which I wrongly assumed were Coptic. Teresa, guidebook in hand, said that it was Greek Orthodox. Flowering trees and perfectly coiffed shrubbery decorated the trail between the graves. A garden for the living who walk among the dead, I mused. I counted dozens of altar tombs and mausolea. Most were adorned with elaborate engravings, and many were topped with crosses, statues, planters, obelisks, and framed photos of the dearly departed.

From the cemetery, Teresa led us down an alley to a nondescript, stone building. “This is the Church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus,” she said. “The Holy Family stayed here on their Flight to Egypt.”

I had never heard of the Flight, and for good reason. Everything I know about Christianity I learned by watching Davey and Goliath, a Claymation television show from the 60s and 70s. The show featured a boy and his dog, one or both of whom got in trouble and learned a moral – that is to say, Christian – lesson by the end of each episode. Whether the show cited scripture per se, I don’t recall, but the Flight didn’t ring familiar to me. “What flight?” I asked. Teresa threw her hands in the air. She ridiculed my secular education and treated me to a passage from the Gospel of Matthew. In the story, of which I remember only the highlights, Matthew recounts the birth of Jesus and the Massacre of the Innocents that followed. The Magi, Teresa said, heralded the birth of Jesus, whom they called the Messiah, but that news terrified poor King Herod, who, by then, was paranoid and very much afraid of the Jews. Herod wasn’t sure when, or to whom, the Messiah was born, so he ordered his army to find and kill all newborn boys in and around Bethlehem. An angel appeared before Joseph, warned him – and evidently only him – of Herod’s infanticidal plan, and told him to take Mary and Jesus to Egypt, where they would be safe, if not exactly comfortable. (Teresa couldn’t say why the angel didn’t warn anybody else, which, to me, is a major flaw in Christianity.) Joseph, Mary, and Jesus fled to Egypt, where they lived for three years. According to Coptic tradition – and our guidebook – they lived in a grotto near the fortress of Babylon. Some years later, the Church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus, itself named for two Roman soldiers martyred for practicing Christianity before Christianity turned chic, was built over that same grotto, or so the story goes. I don’t remember that episode of Davey and Goliath.

The present church dates to the eleventh century, but, just like Amr’s mosque, the church has been renovated and remodeled many times since then. The church’s banal exterior disguised its remarkable interior, which represents some of the finest medieval Christian architecture in the world. Teresa identified the highlights for me, including the thirteenth century iconostasis – an elaborate screen that veils the bema (altar) from the congregation – and parallel rows of columns that border the nave. Those columns, eleven marble and one of red granite, purportedly commemorate the twelve Apostles. The lone, red granite column rebukes, in its own way, Judas for his betrayal of Jesus. The church’s sanctuary stands over the old grotto where the Holy Family stayed all those years ago. It, too, has been renovated and remodeled over the years, so it looks less like a cave and more like a crypt. To get there, we had to go outside, around a corner, and down an alley. An ancient sign pointed the way, and Teresa jogged ahead of me. A short set of stairs led down the subterranean entrance. “Don’t crack your head,” she warned me, “you can’t curse down here!” She needn’t have worried. The old grotto was there, but it was closed for the day. A custodian apologized for the closure and explained that the groundwater there rises and falls with the river. The grotto is unstable. “Turned away at the inn, just like Joseph and Mary,” I said. Teresa ignored me.

Disappointed but undeterred, Teresa marched ahead to the Greek Orthodox Church of Saint George. The church crowns the northern tower of the old fortress, and because the tower is round, so, too, is the church. Two long flights of stairs carry congregants – and out of shape tourists – up the tower. On our way up, we passed a large, high-relief engraving affixed to the tower’s exterior wall. It gave me a good excuse to rest.

“Who’s that?” I wondered aloud while I caught my breath.

“That’s Saint George,” Teresa said.

I stared at her, and waited.

“The patron saint of England?” she added. “He slew the dragon?”

I knew nothing of patron saints, but I knew a bit about dragons. “Dragons aren’t real,” I replied. “Does that mean George wasn’t real either?”

Teresa climbed up the stairs, and I followed a few steps behind.

As suspected, the church was indeed named for George, a Roman soldier, and Christian, martyred, in the third century, for refusing to recant his faith. He was canonized, in the fifth century, and his legend flourished during the Crusades. Around that time, Genoese artists portrayed Saint George draped in a white tunic emblazoned with a red cross, and when the English adopted George as their patron saint, they also adopted his color scheme for their flag. Teresa knew that much from her Catholic education in Ireland, but a placard posted outside the church doors explained that Saint George is also revered in Eastern Orthodoxy, which is how he earned that fabulous, round church in Coptic Cairo. Being a round church, the pews circled the altar like the spokes of a wheel. A dome soared high overhead. A mural of Jesus filled the center of the dome, and his skin, perhaps unsurprisingly, was several shades darker than da Vinci depicted in The Last Supper.

Teresa next looked for the Ben Ezra Synagogue, which, tradition would have us believe, occupies the site where the pharaoh’s daughter found Moses, all those years ago. More recently, and perhaps more believably, Ben Ezra made headlines when, in 1896, scholars from Cambridge University recovered a vast collection of ancient Hebrew texts from the synagogue. The trove was the unintended consequence of Judaic law, which proscribes the destruction or desecration of any document or object that bears any one of the several names of God. To comply with the proscription, many synagogues store unusable or unwanted books, scrolls, certificates, and letters in a sacred “hiding place” called the genizah. For centuries, Ben Ezra’s genizah preserved thousands of religious and secular documents including court records, leases, deeds, contracts, and private letters. Those documents, many of which date back to the synagogue’s founding, in the ninth century, were not meant to be read, or even held, ever again. Indeed, many are extremely fragile or fragmented, and the collection required years of preservation to prevent further decay. Today, the collection is shared among several universities around the world, but some of the ancient texts are still displayed at the old synagogue. Sadly, on the day of our visit, Ben Ezra and its genizah were closed for construction.

The scaffolding and construction debris around Ben Ezra formed a meandering detour that led us around a few corners and down an unnamed alley. Or maybe we just went the wrong way, I’m not really sure. In the end, we stumbled upon a tree-lined patio on the edge of an open pit where a massive section of the old fortress erupted from the bowels of Coptic Cairo. From the pit, a round tower rose several stories over the old riverbank, which itself was about twenty feet below the patio. The tower, with its double walls and arched windows, must have stood a hundred feet wide. The tower ringed a courtyard, but I couldn’t see what lay at the bottom, it was too deep and dark. Defensive walls stretched out from the tower, beneath our feet, and across Coptic Cairo. I was surprised by the size and complexity of the fortress. The modern buildings and roads that surround Coptic Cairo dwarf the old fortress, but, in its time, the old fortress would have dwarfed the huts and lanes that surrounded it.

We only had time to visit one more landmark, and, after a quick consultation with our guidebook, Teresa picked the Hanging Church. Established in the third century, when Christianity was fairly new and practitioners often met in secret, the church’s nickname comes from its position atop the southern gate of the fortress. The gate was then about thirty feet high, and the church, built of simple palm logs and fieldstones, seemed to hang midair, high above the surrounding walls. The church was rebuilt and renovated many times – a common theme in Old Cairo – and though parts of the current building date back to the tenth century, the façade, bell towers, and staircase are relatively recent additions from the nineteenth century. With all the additions and modifications, the church complex looks almost modern, like the architects intended to build a church on the third floor of a Spanish mission. There are few hints of the old fortress visible from the ground floor. We climbed a steep flight of stairs up to a small terrace. There we found a small courtyard surrounded by locked offices and a gift shop. Vendors lined the portico with small tables. They displayed mass cards and trinkets and DVDs emblazoned with images of Mary. The courtyard led to the vestibule and the vestibule led into the old church. The air was dark and warm and haunting, and the room felt like a warehouse for ancient religious icons. The power was off, and the only light came from a few rays of sun that cut through the stained glass windows. The portraits on the iconostasis, illuminated only from behind, and only by the sun, looked ghostly. Teresa knelt and recited a short prayer while I stood off to the side and admired the architecture. A small group of church workers paced around the pews. They pointed and whispered, to and about what I couldn’t tell, but I suddenly felt very guilty, like I was never meant to be there. I told Teresa to take her time, and I retreated outside to the courtyard.

It was late afternoon by the time we left the Hanging Church. I desperately needed a long nap and a cold shower, but Teresa wasn’t done yet. She insisted we walk back to the hotel, by way of Garden City, the neighborhood we passed – but couldn’t reach – earlier that day. She had our return trip planned with maps and timetables and promises of hearty meals to be enjoyed afterward, but she surrendered the idea when she yawned – uncontrollably – halfway through her proposal. I laughed and suggested we hail a taxi, but the street outside Coptic Cairo was still closed to traffic.

Teresa spied a subway stop, Mar Girgis, just across the way, and suggested we try a train back to Gezirah. “We can take the train from here,” Teresa said of Mar Girgis, “and switch up there, downtown, for the train to Opera House. It looks pretty easy.”

“No, that’s Sadat, it’s closed,” I reminded her. There would be no direct routes to Gezirah, so I suggested we take the train two stops to Saad Zaghloul and walk along the river and then over the bridge. “It’s only about a mile from Saad to the hotel,” I said.

Our guidebook was filled with maps, but none showed any detail around Saad Zaghloul. So Teresa scoured our hotel map, and then she smiled. “That’s a great idea,” she said. “If we get out at Saad, we can walk this way, through Garden City!”

My plan was unintentionally perfect – to Teresa. I protested. “It’s getting late,” I said, “and it will be dark soon.”

Teresa would not be swayed by my pitiful argument. In fact, our guidebook specifically recommended we visit Garden City at twilight, “when the dust coating the architectural curlicues turns a warm gold and the starlings shrill in the trees.” Teresa read the fanciful passage aloud, as though it were a commandment handed down by the gods of Lonely Planet. Suddenly invigorated, she insisted that we visit Garden City after all. If all went well, we would find a café in some square, sip tea, and browse bookstores till all hours. But this was Cairo, and all did not go well.

Named for an anti-colonial politician, Saad Zaghloul is a dense civic quarter of government ministries, courthouses, and embassies. Administrative office buildings, some majestic, others brutalist, line the avenues in every direction. Our hotel map showed a neat grid of streets, and we hoped to find a shortcut to Garden City, which lies due west of the subway station. Instead, we emerged from the tunnel to find wide, empty streets lined with concrete blockades, razor-wire fences, blast walls, and armored trucks. A handful of pedestrians – office workers, I presumed by their dress – rushed this way and that. Nobody stopped to say hello. Nobody stopped at all. “It looks just like Belfast,” Teresa complained. Indeed, the civic quarter was anything but civil. We found ourselves in the middle of an urban battlefield where every building in sight was a potential target for violent protests, police shootings, and bombings.

Our map, of course, was useless. Most of the streets were closed, and the sidewalks impassable. The maze of barriers funneled us north, away from Saad Zaghloul and away from Garden City. We scrambled down the road, for several blocks, but there was no escape. Somewhere up ahead, a megaphone filled the air with shouts and chants. The voices, amplified a thousand times, echoed between the buildings and shook the windows. I told Teresa not to worry. “It must be the afternoon call to prayer,” I assured her. By then the streets were deserted, except for the soldiers and the armored trucks and us. We hurried down the road another block and finally found an open side street. We turned the corner and ran headlong into a raging protest. Hundreds of men and women marched up the road. They shouted and chanted and banged on the fences that capped the barricades. Their leader, a young woman with dark hair, shouted into a megaphone, and the protestors shouted after her. Soldiers flanked the protestors. They carried batons and shields like bandleaders in a dystopian parade. And the whole parade marched right at us.

We shouldn’t have been surprised to find a protest. In the months and years after the revolution, there were hundreds of demonstrations, all over Egypt. There were even more after the coup, a couple years later. The police officers and soldiers who minded the demonstrators could, and often did, turn violent without warning. In January 2015, Shaimaa El Sabbagh, a member of Socialist Popular Alliance, was shot and killed by Egyptian police at Tahrir while she placed flowers on a memorial. Witnesses said the police opened fire with no warning, and Shaimaa died on the sidewalk, in her husband’s arms. We were advised to avoid protests at all times. Instead, we walked right into one, head-on. It was Teresa’s worst nightmare.

We retreated back around the corner, up to the next block, but the sounds of the protest, amplified by that megaphone, bounced off the buildings all around us. No matter which way we turned, or how quickly we walked, the chants followed us. We turned another corner, and jogged down a narrow road. That road carried us to the edge of Tahrir. Soldiers stood guard on the mound and on the sidewalks around the traffic circle. Teresa panicked. She stepped off the curb and into traffic. I followed her, but we couldn’t find a path between the bumpers and fenders. We were caught between lanes of harried drivers. A young Egyptian man joined us in the traffic. “You have to walk like an Egyptian,” he said. I thought of the Bangles song and desperately wanted to laugh. By then, Teresa was already halfway across the square, and I could barely keep pace with her. We jogged over the bridge, away from Garden City, away from Saad Zaghloul, and away from Tahrir. Back in our room, I locked the door, turned on the air conditioner, and drew the curtains. Teresa hid in the bathroom and cried.

Our day had started peacefully. We enjoyed our impromptu tour of the Grand Nile, we strolled through a beautiful, riverfront garden, and we toured historic sites in Coptic Cairo. But those last moments, surrounded by blast walls and armored trucks, in the face of angry protestors and armed soldiers, deafened by shouting and chanting, well, it was all too much for Teresa. But it could have been much worse. That morning, as we strolled across Cairo, bombs exploded in the northern neighborhoods of Cairo: four at subway stations and one under a car near a courthouse. Two other bombs were planted but did not explode, though a few hours later two more bombs did. In all, at least eight people were injured by the blasts that day. We had no idea. The panic that gripped Cairo, according to international headlines, didn’t reach our side of the city. We learned about the bombings later that day when we returned to our hotel in Gezirah and checked our e-mail. We each received worried messages like, “There were bombs in Cairo this morning! Send mom and dad an email ASAP, please,” and later, “I can send money if you need to leave quickly.” We flipped through the television channels and looked for news of the attacks. The anchors seemed to talk about the weather and sports. There was no mention of the bombings at all. We searched the Internet for more news. CTV led with a local headline: “Explosions at Cairo subway stations trigger panic,” and CBS News told us “Cairo subway station blasts spark panic.”

“That explains all the police and army trucks this morning,” I said.

“And the protests and tanks this afternoon?” Teresa wondered.

Teresa wanted to go back to Mena House, where they had better security than the Novotel. I said we could leave Egypt altogether, if she wanted. I mentioned something about Greece. We had always wanted to go there, and it would be safe. We could leave the next morning and dip our toes in the Aegean Sea in the afternoon. Teresa wanted time to think.

That evening, we showered and lay in bed and wrote in our journals. We talked again about Greece. Teresa said she might go home, to Ireland, to visit her parents. Suddenly, a loud noise exploded outside our window, then another, and a few high-pitched whistles. Teresa shuddered and told me to look out the window. “Come look,” I shouted. Another wedding party danced in the parking lot under our window. Someone in the crowd set off fireworks and someone else blasted music from a car stereo. We watched and listened to the ceremony from the comfort of the eighth floor. “Zaffa,” Teresa said. We decided to stay in Egypt after all, but looked forward to Luxor.





The Road to Luxor





At checkout, the next morning, Teresa asked the desk clerk whether he knew anything about the bombings or the protests. The clerk tilted his head and considered the question for some time. “No,” he said, he had not heard about any bombs, not lately anyway. He asked whether we were hurt, and, when we assured him that we were fine, he wished us safe travels. “May I call a car or a taxi for you?” he asked. “The police do not allow bags on the metro. For security.”

The clerk was right, of course, luggage of any size was banned on the subway, so we hailed a taxi instead. The driver, a balding middle-aged man with a thick, salt and pepper beard, smiled brightly.

“Hello, Ramses Station. How much, please?” I asked.

The driver did something unusual: he pointed at a meter mounted under the dashboard, and that was good enough for us. Teresa and I climbed aboard, lodged our bags over our laps, and waved goodbye to the hotel. The driver didn’t wait. He pulled into traffic – which was light enough that it moved quickly – and idled along, in the middle lane, at three miles an hour. Dozens of cars and trucks flew by on either side of us. Their drivers honked their horns and swerved at the last second. Our driver, being in no hurry whatsoever, looked in his rearview mirror and asked me a question, in Arabic. He might have said airport at some point, but I couldn’t be sure.

“No. Ramses Station, Al Shohadaa,” I said, but my pronunciation was perfectly terrible. The driver stared into his rearview mirror and frowned. I unfolded our map, handed it to him, and pointed to a small, black icon of a steam engine locomotive.

The driver smiled and nodded. “Mahattat Ramses?” he asked as we chugged along, still in the middle lane, still at three miles an hour, and still with angry drivers on all sides.

Mahattat Ramses is the Arabic name of the train station, but I didn’t know that, and I didn’t know what else to say. In desperation, I blurted “Choo choo! Choo choo!”

The driver laughed out loud and clapped his hands. “Choo choo! Choo choo,” he said. I had made my point, and five minutes later, we stood on the side of the road by Ramses Station. The meter read nine pounds, but I paid twenty. The driver laughed as he drove away.

Hamady, the Harmony Jet ticket agent, was at his desk, right where we had left him a couple days earlier. A cigarette dangled from his lip. He wore a button-up shirt and pulled his trousers up to his ribcage. Excepting a fedora, he looked much like a 1940s B-movie gangster. The phone on his desk never stopped ringing, and a crowd of men jostled for his attention. He waved us over, shook my hand, and asked us to sit outside. “I will bring you to the bus in a few minutes,” he said.

The Harmony Jet office sits off a short arcade that once led to the railway tracks at Ramses Station, but the hallway is now fenced off from the platforms. The arched roof offered a bit of shade, but the air was hot and dry and smelled of diesel and dust. Twenty or so other passengers, all men, shuffled around the arcade and smoked and waited. One of the men, a towering Nubian, noticed me and marched across the hall. He interrogated me, about what I’m not sure. Once again, the only phrase I recognized was al Uqṣur. I shrugged, and said “Luxor.” The Nubian fellow mumbled a few more words, walked away, and leaned against the far wall. This was the first of several such conversations I would have that day, and they would each end in various degrees of success.

Two teenage boys dragged a stack of chairs from the office and lined them along the wall near us. One boy pointed toward a chair and motioned for Teresa to sit. But Teresa was too nervous to sit. She had second thoughts about taking the bus. I tried to reassure her. “It’s only seven hours,” I said. “We’ll be in Luxor before sunset.” Teresa looked around the arcade. There were no women or children. “Besides,” I continued, “Hamady promised there won’t be any stops, and we’ll be dropped off right in the middle of town, near the hotel.” My words offered no relief. We were the only foreigners in the arcade, which meant we would be the only foreigners on the bus. I hoped Teresa hadn’t noticed, but she had.

The bus arrived a bit after noon and parked at the curb on the far side of the parking lot, on the other side of the security fence. It was a recent, but not new, European motor coach dressed in the colors of the Egyptian flag: red, white, and black. We waited for Hamady, but nobody else did. Other passengers swarmed across the parking lot. They climbed over and through the fence toward the bus. Teresa looked at me and frowned, again. “It’s just like Port Authority,” I said.

A few minutes later, Hamady, cigarette on his lip, clipboard in hand, joined us in the arcade. “Follow me,” he said. He escorted us across the parking lot. We boarded the bus, bags in our arms, but the aisle was jammed with luggage and feet and children. Hamady pointed to our assigned seats, and Teresa cringed. The man in the row ahead of her seat had reclined, all the way, and he left no room for her or anybody else. Hamady asked the man to raise his seat, but he just pulled his baseball cap down over his face and turned away. Teresa threw her bag at me and slithered into the narrow seat.

“Don’t worry,” Hamady said, “there might be room after Giza.”

“Giza?” I asked. “I thought this was an express schedule.”

Hamady smiled. “Yes, my friend. One quick stop in Giza, and the rest stop, then express to Luxor.”

We sat there, in our cramped seats, and waited. The bus never moved, and we were late before we even left the station. Hamady and the bus driver chatted and smoked and exchanged clipboards a few times. While Teresa shifted in her seat, I looked up, in the rearview mirror, and counted the other passengers. I hoped to find an open row, but the families and single men filled the seats as far as I could see. I wondered where the women and children hid while we waited for the bus. I hadn’t noticed them in the ticket office or the arcade.

Twenty minutes later, the driver climbed aboard, closed the door and we pulled away from the curb. Traffic was terrible, and the bus inched along for several miles. The first part of the route took us through downtown Cairo, past the Hilton, over the river, and past Novotel, the hotel we had left that morning. It took five minutes to get to the bus station that morning, and a long hour, in traffic, to get back. Teresa squirmed in her seat, and I cursed under my breath.

The trip had barely begun when several passengers unpacked their lunches. Plastic bags and aluminum foils and old newspapers revealed a motley buffet of home-cooked meals and unsavory aromas. I closed my eyes and tried to guess at the spices and oils and meats those passengers carried in their lunch boxes, but the odors comingled before I could venture a fair guess. I wasn’t the only one offended by the accretion of flavors. Two rows up, a passenger rummaged through his bag, pulled out a dark green bottle of essence, and sprayed the air. The essence smelled worse than the food.

I next noticed the man sitting in the row opposite me. He was in his sixties with short-cropped, white hair. His djellaba, grey and frayed at the sleeves, flowed to the floor. He wore a pair of tattered sandals on his leathery feet. Next to him sat a woman much younger than he. She wore a black abaya. Her dark but graying hair peeked around her scarf, just above her eyes. The man opened a two-liter plastic bottle, poured a dark, foamy liquid into a plastic cup, and offered the cup to me.

“Cola?”

“La, shokrun. No, thank you,” I said. In many countries, especially those where poverty is pandemic, like Egypt, it is rude to eat in front of other people. Bus and train passengers often bring extra snacks to pass around, and only then may they eat as well. Teresa and I knew the routine well. We brought a bag of nectarines and a dozen packs of gum to share.

“Cola.” He held up his bottle and shook it. The label was long gone, and I doubted the contents were cola. More likely, the bottle held a homemade batch of erk sous.

“No, thank you.” I held up my bottle of Nestlé water and smiled.

Cola Man, as we affectionately called him, filled two more cups and passed them to the young children in the next row. Then he reached into a bag and pulled out a stack of flat bread, wrapped in layers of tin foil. He offered the bread to me, which I declined. Cola Man turned his gaze to the floor and waved the bread toward Teresa. She declined as well. Having satisfied the ritual food sharing, Cola Man told me a story, about what I can only imagine. He chatted and laughed and smiled at me while I nodded and smiled. After a while, he pointed out the window. His speech slowed and slowed, till suddenly I understood.

“Qina, al Masid, al Uqsur, Idfu...” He recited a list of cities.

“Ah, al Uqsur,” I said.

“al Uqsur! al Uqsur!” Cola Man was very excited by my answer. He pointed toward his family. They, too, were headed to Luxor. We shook hands and laughed and smiled again.

Teresa, meanwhile, stared out the window. She squeezed her hand into a fist and pounded her thigh. I thought she needed more room so I shifted in my seat. Cola Man pointed at my bags and then at the floor and at the ceiling. He stood up and tried to lift Teresa’s bag into the luggage rack over my head, but it wouldn’t fit. I squeezed my bag between my feet on the floor, and Teresa’s bag fit a little better on my lap. It helped a bit, but not much. We had seven hours to go.

Our first stop, on what we thought was an express schedule, was somewhere in Giza, about five miles from Ramses Station. The driver triple-parked in the middle of a crowded intersection and opened the door. Five men and women boarded the bus. One by one, they cracked me in the shoulder and head with their luggage on their way down the aisle. I looked at Teresa. “This might be our last chance to get off the bus,” I said. Teresa clenched her fist tighter. “We don’t know where we are,” she answered. The driver closed the door and pulled into traffic.

We didn’t get very far. A mile down the road, the driver pulled over again. He parked by the curb of a dusty road that ringed an endless and barren field of sand and gravel: the Western Desert. Six young men scrambled aboard: hitchhikers. The driver cursed them and they cursed the driver. I glanced in the rearview mirror again. Four of the hitchhikers found seats scattered across the back rows, but two of them stood in the aisle, one right next to my head. His arm was wrapped in a cast, and I gagged at the stench of fresh plaster. The driver turned around in his seat, and screamed at the hitchhikers. The hitchhikers screamed back. Soon, other passengers stood and yelled, too. Meanwhile, a swarm of flies climbed aboard and flitted from seat to seat. The driver jumped off the bus and walked away. The last two hitchhikers sat on the floor of the aisle. For a short minute, the bus was calm. Then the driver, cell phone to his ear, reboarded the bus and stood on the stairs. He pointed at the hitchhikers and cursed them again. All six hitchhikers stood in the aisle and cursed the driver. Other passengers leapt from their seats and cursed everyone. Cast Man rushed up in the aisle and screamed at the top of his lungs. I could only imagine what was said.

Teresa shook in her seat. When I realized how upset she was, I lost control. I grabbed our backpacks and stormed to the front of the bus. Teresa followed right behind me. Cola Man tried to stop me. “La, la al Uqsur!” he shouted. The driver held up his hand to stop us.

“What’s the problem?” I shouted. “We’re trying to get to Luxor. It’s supposed to be a seven-hour ride, but already it’s been two hours and look where we are: nowhere! We are on the side of the road, and everyone is yelling! I can yell, too, but that won’t get us anywhere!” The driver tried to calm me, but I had no idea what he said. “These men don’t have tickets? Who cares?” I pointed to an empty row behind the driver. “There are two seats here,” I said. “Why are we fighting when there are open seats? Is that the problem? This man over here put his seat in my wife’s lap, but we didn’t complain. We can’t move, we can’t breathe, but we don’t complain. We don’t know where we are, but we don’t complain.” I looked at Cast Man. “You want seats? Take our seats!” I doubt anybody understood my rant, but I dropped our bags on the open row, just behind the driver, and told Teresa to sit down.

The driver jumped off the bus and shouted into his cell phone. When he came back, he pointed at me, then the open seat, and I sat down. The driver cursed the hitchhikers for another long while, but eventually, everyone found a seat, and the bus was calm again. Still, the bus didn’t move. Some time later, I don’t know how long, a large, burly man boarded the bus. He looked at the driver, then he looked at me, but he never said a word. Instead, he sat in the aisle, on the top of the stairs, just below my feet. The driver cursed Burly Man and Burly Man cursed the driver and several other passengers cursed everyone. The driver eventually surrendered. He closed the door and pulled away, but that unscheduled stop, and the shouting match, lasted nearly an hour.

The highway from Giza was freshly paved, lined with tall, halogen streetlamps, and divided by a concrete median strip. There were no cities or towns there, just a yellow-grey moonscape of rock and sand. Still, for the first few miles, hundreds of men lined the shoulder. They flagged passing cars and trucks. Our hitchhikers were lucky, I realized. They found seats on our bus, even though it took awhile. I wondered how long these men on the road would have to wait before, eventually, they would all find rides home.

Traffic on the Desert Highway was heavy but moved quickly. I thought the driver might make up the lost time, but, minutes later, we stopped again. A middle-aged man in a long blue djellaba marched to the front of the bus and cursed the driver for several minutes. As would soon become painfully apparent, he needed to evacuate his bowels. The driver didn’t answer him, but his ears turned red. He pulled off the highway and rolled to a stop on the shoulder. The left side of the bus, where we sat, blocked several feet of the right lane. I imagined the headline: “Truck Crashes into Bus! All Passengers Dead.” The driver opened the door. First, Burly Man jumped off the bus. Then Shitting Man, as I would soon call him, jumped off the bus. A dozen passengers, thinking it were a smoke break, jumped from the bus too. The driver squirmed in his seat and made an angry phone call. I watched the errant passengers. Shitting Man scaled the concrete guardrail, turned his back to the wind, raised his robe to his knees, squatted, and shit over the wall. To make the most of his break, Shitting Man lit a cigarette and drew a few long puffs. After a few minutes, the driver honked the horn and everyone but Shitting Man boarded the bus. Shitting Man never even turned his head. The driver blew the horn for two solid minutes. Teresa covered her head and closed her eyes. Finally, Shitting Man finished. He flicked his cigarette in the road, jumped off the wall, and climbed aboard the bus. The odor of fresh feces wafted in the warm air for several minutes after he walked by.

That unscheduled stop energized our fellow passengers. Several people made phone calls, others opened and ate their foul lunches, and the man seated behind me turned on a small radio. I stared out the window, but the scenery never changed. We were surrounded by gravel and sand on all sides.

Traffic thinned but remained steady. Our driver cruised along at eighty miles an hour most of the way. We passed dozens of small pickup trucks: Nissans, Datsuns, and Isuzus. Each struggled to maintain highway speed. Their beds were overloaded with cargo, and their rear tires were underinflated to bear the extra weight. Some trucks carried furniture, fruit, cardboard, propane tanks, and live chickens. Other pickup trucks carried passengers: men, women, and children packed by the dozen in the open beds. Many of the male passengers pulled their shirts over their heads to block the afternoon sun. We passed several recent wrecks, too. One in particular stood out: two crumpled frames, their metal charred black, blocked the shoulder. The road there was stained with motor oil and rubber. The wreck was so violent that I hoped, for their sake, no one survived the collision.

The Desert Highway runs roughly parallel to the Nile, about ten to twenty miles east of the cities and towns in the river valley. After a few hours, we spotted signs that counted down the distance to Asyut, a major city about halfway between Cairo and Luxor: 100KM, 80KM, 60KM. The State Department warned us to avoid travel in central Egypt. The towns of Beni Suef, Asyut, and Sohag were strongholds of the Muslim Brotherhood, and they were especially risky, they said. The Egyptian government agreed. Buses with more than four foreign passengers were required to arrange a police escort. We were the only two foreigners on the bus that day, and we had no security at all.

We reached our scheduled rest stop a bit after six o’clock. A gravel driveway led us several hundred feet off the road, toward a two-story, concrete building. It was painted in pastel green, blue, and purple. The other passengers quietly filed off the bus, while Teresa and I stayed behind. The last person in line, a large, older woman dressed in a black abaya, stopped next to our seat and spoke to us in Arabic. She pointed at us, her long golden hand covered in henna, then pointed outside. It was time to get off the bus, and she wanted to make sure we understood. I smiled and said “Shokrun. Thank you.” Teresa refused to leave the bus till we got to Luxor, but I wanted to look around.

The bus sat in a parking lot of crushed stone dust, and hordes of black flies swarmed in the air right outside the door. There were two outhouses; each was a stand-alone concrete block, with a line of men at one, and longer line of women at the other. Several men smoked while they waited, but many others skipped the line and shit or pissed in the dust behind the outhouses. There was no door to the main building in the rest area, just a large open arch in the wall. Inside, there were several small restaurant counters along one wall; twenty or so tables filled the center of the room; the concrete floor was covered in dust. The strong scent of shisha smoke and grilled meats filled the air. My mouth watered, but I couldn’t risk the food. I left empty-handed.

I stood in the parking lot, near the bus, and watched Teresa through the windshield. She hadn’t left her seat while I was away. I waved to her and she waved back. Later, she told me that two women had offered drinks and snacks to her, but she declined, she always did. While Teresa sulked on the bus, I paced in the parking lot. Two young women and a little boy stood by the side of the bus. The little boy, he was about six years old, stared at me. He never blinked, and he never moved, not once. I offered a pack of gum to him, but even that gesture would not break his stare. I withdrew my offer. The women with him smiled and watched. When they boarded the bus, one of the women stopped near me. She whispered “shokrun,” and then, “thank you.”

Cola Man met me in the parking lot, near the bus. He continued his mysterious conversation from earlier. I listened intently and hoped to recognize a word or phrase, but never did. He must’ve known that I spoke no Arabic, but he didn’t care. After a few minutes, he finished his story, slapped me on the back, and boarded the bus.

Cast Man joined me next. “Where are you from?” he asked.

“Ireland,” I said.

“Where you go? You go Luxor?” He spoke slowly and chose his vocabulary carefully. “I am sorry. Little English,” he said.

“No, your English is good. It’s much better than my Arabic!”

He laughed and shook my hand. I asked him where was headed. “el Ghardaqa,” he said, and then he repeated himself, for my benefit. “Hurghada, but first Qena.” I recognized the names from our map. Hurghada is a major resort city on the Red Sea, popular with Russian tourists, we were told. Qena is a large city on the Nile, about forty miles north of Luxor, which, if I understood Cast Man, meant that our bus would make a few more stops than Hamady had declared.

We were back on the road by seven o’clock, the very hour we were due in Luxor. A long stretch of hills filled the horizon to the west, so the sun set earlier than it had in Cairo. Teresa fidgeted in her seat as the sky darkened. We soon reached a traffic circle and a police checkpoint. A sign pointed toward Asyut, but the driver turned the other way. Our maps didn’t show the roads in this part of the desert, and for the first time on the trip, we had no idea where we were. Worse yet, the road deteriorated after the checkpoint. The first stretch of the Desert Highway was wide and freshly paved. South of Asyut, the highway narrowed to a four-lane road with no median strip. The hills enclosed the highway and formed a narrow canyon. The sky was black and there were no streetlights. The road wound around hills and ran through valleys till we couldn’t even tell which direction we were headed. The road was paved with loosely-packed sand and gravel, and heavy machinery idled on the shoulders. The traffic ahead kicked up dust, and we could barely see through the windshield. Opposing traffic drifted into our lane. The drivers reserved their headlights for the last possible second and flashed their high beams like semaphores. Our driver played the game, too. His passing technique left little room for error. He was good, but imperfect. On several near misses, the bus skipped from the road to the shoulder. The tires spit gravel against the wheel wells. The rat-a-tat-tat sounded exactly like machine-gun fire.

Somewhere between the black hills and the machine-gun roadbed, the driver decided it was time for a film. He flipped a switch on the dashboard, and a thirteen-inch color television that hung from the ceiling over the windshield crackled to life. The DVD was a poor copy, even by bootleg standards, so the screen was blurry and lines crisscrossed over the screen for the first few minutes. Eventually, we realized it was a John Travolta film, From Paris with Love. The film was heavily edited, to about forty-five minutes, and only showed the action sequences: fight scenes, car chases, and a rocket explosion. The final scene showed a female suicide bomber at a political summit. She is shot and killed while trying to detonate her explosives. Following that scene, the DVD unceremoniously switched to a second film, also heavily edited to about forty-five minutes. That film, Body of Lies, featured Leonardo DiCaprio in a political action-thriller set in Iraq. Near the end of the film, DiCaprio’s character is dropped off in the middle of the desert, kidnapped, and tortured. During the dramatic torture scene, with DiCaprio tied to a chair and covered in blood, several people in the back of the bus cheered. The screen faded to black, and once again, the bus was quiet.

Around nine o’clock, the bus turned off the highway, crossed a bridge, and headed west. A road sign announced our next stop: Qena. The driver switched on the interior lights as we rolled through several checkpoints on the edge of town. Police officers lined the road and stared up through our windows. Nobody spoke, and nobody moved. When the bus passed inspection the driver accelerated and sped into town. Concrete apartment blocks and minarets and palm trees filled the skyline. People filled the sidewalks, children played in the streets, and music blared from shops and restaurants. The bus slowed to a stop near a busy intersection. Cast Man slid up the aisle and leaned on my seat. He pointed out the window. “Qena, not Luxor,” he said as he patted me on the shoulder like an old friend. Cast Man, his hitchhiking friends, Burly Man, and several other passengers climbed off the bus and disappeared into the crowded streets.

From Qena, the road to Luxor followed the Nile. Leafy, green trees lined the curb, and a narrow median strip divided the road. We passed through countless towns and villages, and wished dearly that we had passed this way earlier, when the sun was up. The scenery looked quite pleasant from our front row seats. Traffic was light, and we saw more horse-drawn trailers than cars. We passed through several more police checkpoints, one every few miles, and our driver carefully maneuvered the bus between tubular-steel barriers and over rows of speed bumps. The police checked the driver’s papers several times, but they never boarded the bus. We stopped in every town and village along the way. One or two passengers set down here and there, but the bus never seemed to empty.

If there were a sign for Luxor we never saw it, but there we were. The driver pulled over, turned around in his seat and looked at us. “OK, Luxor,” he said. It was almost midnight, and our seven-hour bus ride had turned into twelve. Our guidebook described a busy bus station on the east side of town, near the airport. There would be a line of taxis waiting for us, it promised. Instead, we were dropped at the curb near a busy traffic circle, with no signs or friendly faces to point the way. Passengers stormed the aisle and rushed off the bus. Cola Man and his family ran into the waiting arms of family and friends. We slipped off the bus and into the arms of a middle-aged man in a white, button-up shirt. He held up his hand and waved to us. “Tax! Tax!”

“Sonesta Hotel, Corniche el Nile. How much, please?” I asked.

“Yes, it is very far, four kilometers at least. Fifty pounds.” The driver rubbed his hands together and licked his lips.

“No. Twenty pounds.” I don’t know why I tried to negotiate. Teresa would have paid anything just to get to the hotel.

“No, my friend. Fifty pounds. Very far.”

We followed the driver to his taxi: a tiny, white, four-door sedan that spewed black exhaust from a cracked muffler. We collapsed on the backseat, with our bags on our laps, and our knees to our chins. The driver sped away from the curb, honked his horn a few times, and drove into the night. He pointed out the major sights: Luxor Temple, the Winter Palace, and the Mummification Museum. Suddenly, we were in front of the Sonesta St. George. Our fifty-pound ride, which lasted about three minutes, was not so far after all.



⁂



The first thing I noticed about Luxor was the sun – there was a lot of it. Our room, which overlooked the Nile and the adjacent sewage treatment facility, had floor-to-ceiling windows, and the drapes, heavy though they were, offered little resistance to the morning light. The sun beat through the drapes and painted the room with undulating waves of orange and white, which, in the winter, might have been interesting, but, in the summer, were uncomfortably warm. I had set the air conditioner to full blast before we went to sleep, but, sometime overnight, the power failed. Hours later, as we lay in bed, the vents blew warm air, and as the sun crested the horizon, the warm air became unbearable. Unable to sleep, we showered and dressed and lazed about the room. The lights flickered on and off every once in awhile. So, too, did the air conditioner. Teresa wiped her brow and told me to check the thermostat. I didn’t have to. “Rolling brownouts, get used to it,” I said. Rolling brownouts are common in Egypt, and you can predict their frequency with a simple formula: the further you are from the presidential palace, the more likely you are to suffer a brownout. So the hotel, like many public facilities – including hospitals and police stations – had a generator to cope with the loss of power, and like most generators, the hotel’s was strong enough to operate the lights, but little else. Over the next few days, whenever we heard the clunk, spit, sputter, clunk, clunk, pfffft, we knew what to expect, and we avoided the elevators whenever possible.

We surrendered our room to the sun and went for breakfast in the lobby. In better times, the hotel restaurant would seat a couple hundred people, but, that morning, we had the dining room to ourselves. A waitress brought coffee and filled our glasses with water while we toured the buffet. Trays of bread, muffins, croissants, cheeses, deli meats, cut fruit, dry cereals, and fruit juice filled a long row of tables. Another row of tables offered grilled tomatoes, beef sausages, potatoes, something that looked like grits but wasn’t, and the ubiquitous fuul. Across the room, a chef stood ready to prepare custom egg dishes, and Teresa obliged by ordering one, scrambled. About twenty minutes later, as we wiped our mouths clean, the hostess seated a second couple at a large table across the room from us. It was then that I realized the absurdity of where we were. After the revolution, a few years earlier, Egypt’s tourist industry collapsed. Some news accounts claimed that tourism in Luxor was down by ninety per cent, and we were there in summer, a very slow period anyway. Those trays of food, the lonely egg chef, the empty dining room – it was all meant for a crowd that didn’t exist. The hostess cleared our table and asked whether we enjoyed the food. “Yes, of course,” I said. I wanted to ask what the hotel did with the leftover food, but I was afraid to hear the answer.

After breakfast, we retired to the lobby, where we collapsed in oversized lounge chairs and debated whether to leave the hotel at all that day. It was Friday, the day of rest and prayer in Egypt, and we observed the tradition in our own way. We took the day off from tours and taxis and touts, and sought, instead, an activity that landed firmly between sloth and lethargy, to match the languor we suffered after our extended bus ride the day before. Our guidebook recommended the usual suspects (museums and shopping and hiking), any one of which sounded entirely too strenuous for our scheduled day of rest, and I rejected each in turn. Teresa, who felt a bit more energetic than me, wanted to hire a hot-air balloon for an aerial tour of the valley, which Lonely Planet highly recommended, but when I asked the desk clerk for information, she shook her head. The balloons left early in the morning, she said, around four or five o’clock, and there were few tours anymore, she added without further explanation. She didn’t have to explain. I had read about the fiery crash in which nineteen tourists died the year before, after which the industry was banned, nationwide, for an indefinite period. I didn’t mention any of that to Teresa. I just told her that the tours were shuttered for the summer holiday. Teresa didn’t mind, though. By then she had found a better idea. We could hire a felucca, our guidebook said, and sail upriver to Banana Island. We didn’t know much about Banana Island, which our guidebook simply said was a popular destination, but we had read about feluccas. The traditional sailboats, perfectly adapted to river travel – shallow-draft and single-masted – are found all over the Mediterranean, but especially along the Nile. A few hours at sea would satisfy our competing desires of rest and recreation, and a felucca would be our vessel of choice.

Our hotel overlooked the Nile, so we didn’t give much thought to where or how we would find a captain that day. Our guidebook simply said that we would find a “multitude” of sailboats and captains along the river and left the arrangements – like when and where – up to us. By then, the desk clerk had disappeared to some unknown corner of the hotel, which, given the shortage of clients, was perfectly reasonable, and, save for the lone security guard, who busied himself with a Quran, the lobby was deserted, as was the pool, and the dock. With no one to ask, Teresa instead consulted our map. She spotted something that looked like a marina, near town, and we agreed it would be a fine place to look for a felucca.

On our way into town, we paused on the steps of the hotel, to collect our bearings, and, in that moment of indecision, we drew the attention of a dozen hantour drivers. We hadn’t noticed them, parked as they were, down the block, in the shade, but they noticed us. They drove their carriages at us and shouted over each other: Where you go next? Hey, mister! You know how much? Please, mister, ten pounds to start my day. The market is this way. The horses were emaciated and fatigued and their fur threadbare. The carriages they hauled looked no better. The seats – leather and velvet over a slim cushion – were tattered and patched and looked especially uncomfortable. The sight filled me with sympathy and disgust, and I wished I had never seen the poor animals or their drivers. “La, shokrun, la, shokrun,” I called, but the drivers wouldn’t hear me. They were desperate for business, and, in a tourist city with no tourists, Teresa and I were the only prospects.

We turned our backs to the carriages and strolled along the Corniche, toward the marina. The hantours followed us for awhile, but, one by one, they fell behind, and the drivers’ catcalls drifted to the wind. One driver, though, persisted far longer than dictated by common decency. He leapt from his carriage and walked in the street, at my side, for half a mile. His horse, out of loyalty or boredom, I’m not sure which, trailed right behind, and I drew some comfort from the rhythmic hoof clops. The driver, Sonny, knew all the best restaurants, he told us, and he knew all the best vendors at the market, and he swore, hand to his heart, that we were going the wrong way, which was strange, given that he repeatedly asked where we were going without ever waiting for an answer. Between pitches, Sonny peppered us with dire predictions for our health and welfare if we continued on without him. “It is not safe for you. It is very dangerous that way,” he pleaded. “There is nothing to see. Come with me. The market is this way.”

We soon reached a traffic circle near town, and the intersection, which saw no traffic at all that morning, marked an invisible boundary that neither Sonny nor his horse would cross, which was fine with us, but not with Sonny. Sonny threw a fit. He grabbed his horse by the reins with one hand and grabbed me by my shoulder with the other. “You can’t go down there, there is nothing to see!” he shouted. His face reddened and his eyes bulged.

To my credit, I must say that I possess equal measures of patience and temper, and, till that point, I accepted Sonny’s taunts and stories with more respect and restraint than the man deserved. He should not have grabbed me. I tore away from him, put my fist in his face, and cursed his ancestors and their ancestors before them. With each malediction, I curled my fist tighter, but Teresa begged me not to strike the man. Sonny didn’t care. He didn’t care about me or my temper or my threats. He just leaned back against his carriage and waved us off. “Oh, you’ll see! You’ll be sorry! There is nothing for you that way! It is very dangerous for you!”

Contrary to Sonny’s assertions otherwise, the world did not end at that traffic circle. We were perfectly safe, there was plenty to see, and we soon found the marina. A driveway sloped down the riverbank to a tree-lined promenade along the waterfront. There we found a fleet of dormant vessels tethered to the docks, five or six deep. We counted scores of decommissioned river cruisers, ferries, tour boats, and feluccas, but for all the watercraft moored at the docks, there were none on the river – none at all. The river was calm and lonely, and so, too, was the promenade. There were no captains or crews, nor were there any passengers to hire them. Vacant storefronts lined the boardwalk, but there were neither merchants nor customers to enjoy them. We peeked through dark windows and knocked on locked doors, but gathered no answers. For all intents and purposes, the river was closed, and had been for some time. Long-distance cruises between Luxor and Cairo were suspended, in the 1990s, we later learned, amid recurrent attacks by militant forces. Shorter trips, between Luxor and Aswan, were popular until the revolution, after which the scarcity of clients merited a proportionate scarcity of cruises. A few ferries and tour boats carried passengers across the river, but scheduled service was then unreliable at best. As for the feluccas, well, they were there, berthed by the dozen, their sails furled or stowed for the foreseeable future. Later on, in Aswan, we would encounter dozens of boatmen, but in Luxor, we found not one. Our sailing trip would have to wait.

Other than us, the only people on the promenade that morning were five or six boys, about ten or twelve years old. They wore slacks and polo shirts and I wondered whether they had just come from Friday services, they were dressed that well. The boys leaned against a railing, near one of the docks, and stared into the water. When we drew near, they waved and called out to us: euro, money, dollars. One of them, a fat cub, waddled over to us and put his hand to his mouth. “I am hungry,” he said. I’m sure he was, but not because he hadn’t eaten. Begging is an age-old pastime in Egypt, especially among children, and especially along the river. The tradition dates back, at least, to the nineteenth century when steamships and dahabeahs cruised the Nile. Beggars, many of whom were young boys like the ones we met, swarmed the riverbanks and cried for baksheesh, and many foreign travelers obliged, often for sport. Sometime around 1907, Egyptian and European officials condemned the “pernicious habit” with a notice that read, in part:



Tourists should especially abstain from throwing money from the decks of the steamers to the landing-stages or on to the banks of the Nile for the purpose of witnessing the scramble for the coins; such exhibitions are mischievous as well as degrading.



In keeping with the age-old policy, we abstained from tipping the boys.

We had, by then, exhausted our two favored options for the day (ballooning and sailing) and settled instead on a lazy crawl around town. We followed the Nile downriver and soon stumbled upon something called the Avenue of Sphinxes. The old avenue, two miles long and garnished, as one would imagine, with parallel rows of stone sphinxes, once linked the temples for which Luxor and Karnak are most famous, but, in the latter half of the twentieth century, gimcrack apartment blocks sprouted over the avenue like weeds. Historians and archaeologists hope to correct that failure of urban planning. Many of those blocks have been, or will be, demolished, and sections of the old avenue have been, or will be, restored to their former glory, but the project, which displaced thousands of residents, is far from complete. Meanwhile, and as our guidebook acknowledged, concrete barriers and chain link fences conceal much of the old avenue behind “an artery of roadworks.” We stuck our noses through the fencing, but all we saw was a brown field of cracked earth and mounds of rubbish dumped over the walls by unscrupulous trash haulers. The stench drove us back to the Corniche.

We followed the Nile back upriver, toward town, where found the Luxor Temple. The sun hovered overhead, like a billion-watt bulb, and broiled the atmosphere, which, coupled with the upcoming holiday and the dearth of tourists, would explain why the ruins were deserted in the middle of the day. We had the good sense to wear hats and sunscreen and sunglasses, but, even then, our skin burned and our eyes teared. Neither of us could read our guidebook in the blinding light. Rather than risk life and limb tripping over ourselves or loose cobblestones, we instead admired the temple from the safety of the curb, in the shade of narrow palms that encircled the lot. Luckily, the site was protected only by a waist-high enclosure wall, and most of the features, many of which stood fifty or a hundred feet tall, were visible en plein air. A tourist map, posted near the ruins, illustrated and described the site for us. The temple, it said, was called Ipt Rsyt, and the largest, and arguably most impressive features, were built during the New Kingdom, about thirty-five hundred years ago. The pharaohs built peristyle and hypostyle halls, pylons, obelisks, and sanctuaries. Later residents, including the Greeks and Romans, added gates, a quarry, churches, and a mosque. (The University of Chicago added the map.) Here, too, archaeologists and masons have restored large sections of the old temple, and other than the garbage cans and floodlights, the ruins looked much like they did centuries ago.

From the temple, we followed the Corniche back to our hotel. Along the way, we again drew the attention of a dozen hantour drivers, including my arch nemesis, Sonny. He met us on the corner by the traffic circle, where we had left him a few hours before. Once again, he jumped in front of me on the sidewalk and blocked my way. “Where are you going?” he asked rhetorically. “There is nothing to see down there. Tourists are not allowed to go that way!” This time I pushed him to the side, a decision that I do not regret. Sonny stumbled to the ground and cursed after us for a long while.

Over the next few hours, we showered and rested. Teresa read a book on the balcony while I lay in bed and groaned at each successive brownout: clunk, spit, sputter, clunk, clunk, pfffft. The electric lights were unnecessary – even with the heavy drapes closed, the sun lit the room well enough to read – but after each brown out, of which there may have been a dozen that day, the room warmed quickly and my skin turned red. Teresa, who wears a jacket in the middle of summer, thought the air, without benefit of conditioning, was a bit warm, but quite pleasant. I, on the other hand, would set the temperature to Arctic if there were such a button. By four o’clock, there was no hint of the electricity returning, and I decided that if I were to die of heat stroke it might as well be on the streets of Luxor, rather than in bed.

We began our second tour of Luxor that day with a trip to the legendary Winter Palace Hotel, to visit the Thomas Cook office. Thomas Cook, which was then one of the world’s largest and oldest travel bureaus, specialized in tours of Egypt, and, with their help, we would reserve a tour of Abu Simbel, in deep Upper Egypt, or Dakhla, an oasis in the Western Desert. It could only be easier than making train reservations, which we were unable to do in Cairo, and it would certainly be more comfortable than a bus ride.

On our way to town, we attracted the attention of yet another hustler. This one leaned against a sign post, in the slim shade it offered, and sucked on a thistle. He was svelte and wore his hair greased back and his pose reminded me of James Dean. On the curb in front of him sat a boy, about eight years old, who was so small that we didn’t notice him at first. When we passed the pair, the knave leapt to action. He shadowed me, and the boy shadowed him. “Hello, remember me? From the hotel?” the hustler asked. I was disappointed by his conventional approach. The hustler was no James Dean after all. He was amateurish and obvious and would make a terrible mentor for the little boy who trailed him.

“Yes, my friend, how are you?” I replied with a snort.

“My friend, you are going the wrong way. The market is over here. Please, let me show you the way.” He pointed down a dingy side street, away from the Corniche and away from our destination.

“Of course, yes, that sounds wonderful. Thank you very much for your help,” I said while blithely ignoring his commands.

“No, my friend, you will miss the market, there is nothing down there for you. Please, it is very dangerous that way.” The hustler and his boy left us at the same traffic circle where we lost Sonny earlier that day.

“Did you really recognize him from the hotel?” Teresa asked me.

“No, of course not.”

“You’re terrible. Why do you play along then?”

We found the Winter Palace, as expected, right next to the Luxor Temple. We toured the grounds and roamed the halls where Howard Carter announced his discovery of Tutankhamen’s tomb (1922), and where Agathie Christie resided while she composed Death on the Nile (1937), then made our way to the Thomas Cook bureau on the ground floor. The office was dark but cool and comfortable. The agent was friendly, but unable to help. “To Dakhla is closed for the summer,” he said. “No trains, no buses, only private car or minibus. Normally, we can find a driver for six hundred pounds, one-way. Hotel is difficult for the summer. I can show you a list, but will make no promises. Ramadan comes soon, and it will be more difficult for you. Abu Simbel is not from here. You must go first to Aswan and from there take car or bus.” The agent offered a few pamphlets with pictures of hot air balloons and ancient temples and wished us luck on the rest of our trip.

There was a second travel agent at the Winter Palace. His was a smaller, independent agency, also on the ground floor, under the stairs. The agent, a slender fellow dressed in jeans and T-shirt, was eager to help, but no, he agreed, there were no trains or buses to the desert (though there were till a few years ago) and the easiest way to reach Abu Simbel would be by train to Aswan and convoy from there. It would be very difficult, he explained, to hire a driver to Dakhla or any oases that time of year. He made a quick and curt phone call, and the answer was just as he feared. The driver wanted five hundred fifty pounds, one-way, and we would have to leave Luxor at three o’clock in the morning, to avoid the heat. Teresa rejected the very idea of a high-speed night run through the desert. “Too scary,” she said. (A few months after our trip, a military helicopter killed a dozen tourists in the White Desert. The tour group, which traveled with a police escort, had stopped for a break, when, according to The New York Times, the helicopter crew mistook them for militant Islamists forces.) The agent agreed that the trip could be dangerous, and he admitted that he had never tried it, though many of his clients had. He wished us well on the rest of our trip and begged us to return another year. “It can only get better,” he said with a laugh.

From the Winter Palace, we strolled through downtown Luxor. We inspected the train station, visited the tourist information office, and searched for dinner, all with mixed results. The train station’s classic Egyptian motif certainly impressed, but the tourist information office – sparkling new and perfectly modern – housed nothing more than empty brochure racks and a hapless information officer. We fared no better with our dinner choices. We tried for two places recommended in our guidebook, one of which, Mish Mish, had long since gone out of business, and one of which, Sofra, that we just couldn’t find. Most other restaurants and cafes were either closed for the afternoon or closed for the season, so we broadened our search and marched onward.

Eventually, we settled on a restaurant, which I won’t name, but it was on St. Joseph Street, a few blocks from our hotel. The host, an eager Egyptian man in a black, button-up shirt and apron, showed us to a table near the windows. The lights were off, and the bright sun illuminated the dining room through large windows and a set of French doors. The black-and-white tiled floor sparkled in the sunlight, and the off-white walls were sparingly decorated with photographs of famed actors. The area by the front door was filled with a sectional sofa and two matching chairs around a coffee table; a smoking lounge of sorts. Two mature British women sat there and talked at an older Egyptian fellow. He listened patiently, but rarely spoke, while the three of them chain-smoked. The rest of the dining room was filled with a half dozen tables covered in red and black table clothes, and a few coolers with bottled drinks lined the wall. Other than the cigarette smoke, it was a very charming restaurant. What we didn’t know, and really couldn’t know, was that while we walked around Luxor that day, there had been another series of rolling brown outs, and the restaurant still had no power when we sat down.

The host, who seemed a bit frustrated, brought two menus. We ordered two sodas (Coke for me, Fanta Orange for Teresa). The menu included a barrage of British-themed meals: steak with mushrooms, grilled sea bass in a lemon-butter sauce, quiches, scones, and Mexican chili (never try the chili). I tried the local favorite, chicken shawarma, and Teresa ordered a mince-onion potato pie with mushy peas. Both of our orders came with big, fat steak fries. It was only after we ordered our food that we realized there was no power. Our drinks were cool, but not cold, and all the coolers, air conditioners, and fans were off. Teresa suggested we cancel our order, but I was hungry and tired, and figured the power would be back soon enough. Besides, I enjoyed eavesdropping on the conversation in the smoking lounge.

“But why? Why do you make yourselves so damned miserable?” The British women were exasperated, and they interrupted each other’s rant, as they took turns berating the Egyptian fellow. “Where, where in the Quran does it say you have to suffer like this? It’s unhealthy!”

“It’s simply our religion; it’s our life.” Egyptian Man had heard the argument before, probably from these same women. “It is not suffering.”

“It’s so fucking hot though. In winter you starve yourselves for eight hours a day, it’s no big deal,” said British Woman One.

“Yeah, men just sleep through the fasting anyway in winter, it’s not like you’re really fasting anyway. But the women have to cook all day and clean up after you men.” British Woman Two took a huge drag of her cigarette, turned her head and coughed a plume of grey smoke.

“You’re all killing yourselves. Do you know how unhealthy it is to go all day without food or water in this heat! You’re fucking insane.” British Woman One stood up and marched out the door, as though some unknown voice had summoned her.

“It’s the women who have to suffer while you men sit around all day pouting and bitching like children. Your whole life? What’s the point!?” British Woman Two sat back against the couch and put her feet on the coffee table.

“We do it for God. It’s not suffering. If you believe it is for God, it is easy, and good for the soul.” Egyptian Man was unfazed by the British women; they clearly didn’t understand his religion, and he had no interest in proselytizing. He finished his cigarette and sat back in his chair without another word. A few minutes later, a taxi arrived and British Woman Two rode off into the afternoon. Egyptian Man waited a few minutes and left on foot; he seemed almost relieved to be alone.

They were discussing Ramadan and the fard practice of sawm, the religious duty of most adult Muslims to fast from sunrise to sunset. On the Islamic calendar, Ramadan is the ninth month of the year, and, because the months are measured by lunar cycles, the year only has 354 days. The discrepancy between the lunar and solar calendars (used on the Gregorian calendar) means that Ramadan, and all Islamic months, drift through the seasons. Some years, Ramadan occurs during winter, and the days are quite short; fasting, therefore, is easier to manage. During our visit, Ramadan fell during summer, when the long days and intense heat intensified the fast. In fact, that year, Egypt suspended Daylight Saving Time, but only for the month of Ramadan. In doing so, the sun set an hour earlier, so people could break their fast earlier, which made little sense to me, because they also have to start their fast an hour earlier, and the length of the day’s fast remains the same. The British women, in their crass argument, weren’t entirely wrong, though. Fasting during the Egyptian summer is physically challenging, and many, if not most, practitioners respond by reducing their activity during the day; they sleep much of the afternoon, and they work less. Shops, factories, museums, and offices close early, and, according to an article on National Public Radio, the entire country’s economy slumps during the month.

We finished our drinks, and the host seemed nervous. He fidgeted at the counter in the kitchen, moved plates from side to side, opened cupboards and drawers, and chopped unseen foods. At one point, he ran out the door and whistled for a young boy walking down the road. We watched out the window as the host handed a wad of crumpled money to the boy, and the boy ran off. Teresa and I looked at each other then we ordered another round of drinks and waited. Dinner, if it ever came, would be interesting.

A woman with short, blonde hair appeared from a back room and walked over to us. She introduced herself as the owner and apologized for the lack of air-conditioning while bemoaning the rolling brown outs. The woman said she was from England, the Midlands to be precise, and always thought she wanted to live in Cairo; it was an exotic and sunny fantasy world. She met a man in Cairo, she continued, but she hung on the word man as though it were a curse or an embarrassment, and they soon moved to Luxor. She had lived in Luxor for nearly ten years, and now found Cairo exhausting. Somehow, the conversation turned to baksheesh, and the woman shared her very strong and honest opinion. Her voice grew till she was nearly shouting, “Oh, don’t give them anything,” she said, “none of them deserve it and they don’t do anything.”

The electricity suddenly kicked on, as though her voice had angered, or pleased, some god. The air conditioner blew hot air for a few minutes, and the oscillating floor fans roared to life. A few minutes later, we heard the sound of food grilling in the kitchen, and we realized how hungry and hot we were.

A young Anglo-Indian woman, in her mid-twenties, and wearing a long dress, opened the door and took a seat near a fan. She spoke to the host as though she knew him well, and ordered a scone and a cup of tea. The owner excused herself from our conversation and hovered over the young woman. They chatted for quite awhile. The host returned to our table with two large plates of hot food. My shawarma was served on a long, soft roll stuffed with grilled chicken, peppers, and a tahini sauce; it was every bit as glorious as any meal I had yet to eat in Egypt. The fries were massive slabs of potato, crunchy on the outside and steamy soft inside. Teresa’s mince-onion potato pie was flaky and perfectly seasoned; her only complaint was that she was so hungry she ate it too quickly.

When we finished our meals, the owner returned to clear our plates and continue our earlier conversation. I asked whether she had ever visited Abu Simbel, a historic temple south of Aswan, near the border of Sudan.

“You know, when I first traveled to Egypt, I wanted to see the pyramids,” she said, “and when I saw them I was gobsmacked. They are that amazing. But when I first saw Abu Simbel, it was beyond amazing. They pick you up at your hotel, at like three o’clock in the morning, and you travel in a convoy at night. They drive like mad through the desert and drop you off first thing, as the sun rises. It’s very scary but amazing.”

We turned the conversation to security and tourism in Egypt. I explained that Teresa was nervous about being in Egypt. I described our bus trip from Cairo, and asked about the heavy police security we had seen all over the country.

“Oh, so much of it’s just for show, you know. The police station around the corner was attacked a few years ago, so the street is closed and the police stand guard at all hours. But it’s safe now. I don’t know why the embassies tell people not to come here. So much of the violence you see on TV is staged. They actually go around with camera crews and film it like a play. It’s all for propaganda on Al Jezeera. I’ve lived here almost seven years and all that ever happened to me was my bag was snatched. But it was just a serial thief and they caught him, you know. I really feel perfectly safe everywhere I go.”

We thanked the woman, paid the host, and left. Teresa said she felt much better about traveling in Egypt after speaking with the restaurateur. A few hours later, Teresa lay in bed and watched one of my favorite movies, Tango and Cash, while I hovered over the toilet bowl and regurgitated my dinner. Although I truly enjoyed my food, and our conversations, it may have been unwise to eat in a restaurant that had no electricity.





Hat and a Cheap Suit





The electricity failed again, sometime overnight, and the air conditioner blew warm air at the ceiling. I rolled over in bed and stared at the window; a beam of sunlight pierced the dark through a razor-thin crack between the drapes. The light reached across the room and danced in the mirror on the wall. I stared at that beam with one eye, my other eye closed shut against the coming day. Teresa lay next to me, sound asleep. In this way we are polar opposites. I fall asleep quickly and wake up easily; too easily, she says. Teresa, however, lays in bed, sometimes for hours, trying to fall asleep on most nights, and no earthly alarm can wake her. So that morning I lay there, alone but not alone. I gulped the hot, dry air, and hoped the electricity would return. Soon, the sun burst through the drapes and flooded the room. It was five o’clock in the morning.

It was the first day of Ramadan, and the city busily readied itself for a month-long celebration. Traffic was heavy, and the air was thick with exhaust and loud with horns. Amid warnings of oppressive heat and a solar index of eleven (whatever that meant), Teresa and I decided to find a taxi for our trip uptown, to Karnak. We didn’t stand a chance. The hantour drivers circled their wagons in front of the hotel. When we stepped to the curb, they wrangled their carriages straight toward us. We jogged in the street, toward oncoming traffic, but the hantour drivers showed no fear. They drove their horses through moving traffic for several blocks. Where you go next? You cannot go that way! By the time we reached the traffic circle at Salah el Deen, just half a mile away, our clothes were soaked in sweat, and I could barely breathe. We followed the river to the Winter Palace Hotel where we expected to find a line of taxis. There were none. We passed the Luxor Temple; a pair of hantour drivers slept on the ground under the trees, their sickly horses stared blindly at the ground. The parking lot by the temple, where we saw several taxis the day before, was empty except for one lonely tour bus.

We followed the avenue of sphinxes north toward Karnak, and finally a taxi driver stopped next us. Tax! The driver wanted fifty pounds for the short ride to the temple, but we settled on ten. A few minutes later, we climbed out of the taxi at Karnak. We had walked most of the way after all, and our taxi ride was less than a mile. The driver offered to wait for us, but we declined. He wasn’t satisfied. “Where you go next? What is your hotel? Did you go to market?”

The temple complex at Karnak spans several hundred acres on the right bank of the Nile, a few miles north of town. The building spree began during the Middle Kingdom, when Senusret I erected a simple, one-room shrine here, not far from his capital, Waset (site of modern Luxor). Subsequent pharaohs built larger and more complex temples around the old shrine till, eventually, the temple complex featured thousands of statues, obelisks, pylons, the largest hypostyle hall in the world, and a sacred lake or two. Along the way, the original shrine was dismantled and used as fill. In later dynasties, the pharaohs moved their capitals north, and the temple complex at Karnak was abandoned. Christians and pagans occupied the site for centuries afterward. The old temples offered shelter and shade to thousands of people. Meanwhile, the river slowly covered the site in sand and silt, and many of the statues and smaller features disappeared under new ground. Muslim Arabs conquered Egypt, in the seventh century. When they crossed the old site they found columns and walls and pylons and obelisks buried in the earth, and among those features they also saw a flotilla of stone heads in an ocean of sand. The heads were, of course, the upper ends of the old statues, buried to their necks. The new landlords, to whom idolatry was a sin, defaced and beheaded most of the statues. European archaeologists and explorers unearthed the site in the nineteenth century, and the Egyptian government has since spent millions of pounds to develop and restore Karnak. Most recently, they installed a modern visitors’ center, water closets, shops, and cafes. To think, it all started with a one-room shrine.

In better weather, tour buses fill a massive parking lot near the temple complex. The buses disgorge hordes of grumpy, sweaty families fresh from the Red Sea or Sinai Peninsula resorts. The tourists often arrive a bit after dawn, in the cool morning air, relieve themselves in the air-conditioned water closets at the visitors’ center, cross a broad courtyard ringed by sphinxes, and tear through the complex with reckless abandon. An hour or so later, as the sun cooks the atmosphere, and pink skin turns brown, the tourists rush to buy schlocky souvenirs – plastic pyramids, plastic obelisks, and plastic replicas of King Tut’s burial mask – on their way back to their buses.

On our visit, the parking lot and the temple complex were empty, at first. We stood on a plaza, just outside the visitors’ center, and marveled at the shopping complex. One shop, Bazaar Asia, sold shirts and hats and sunglasses; their large, overhead sign advertised Kit Kat candy bars. There were two coffee shops with outdoor seating; each sold Nestlé water and ice cream and Coca Cola drinks. A sign pointed toward an apteka but we couldn’t see it. Even the merchants were conspicuously absent; their shops open but seemingly abandoned.

The visitors’ center was large, modern, and spotless. Inside we found a wide-open courtyard, two stories tall and a hundred feet across. Sunlight flooded the center of the room through the glass-paneled ceiling. Concrete columns supported the second floor much like the peristyle halls we would soon tour in the old temple complex. Large-format, black-and-white photographs decorated the walls with historic images of the site, much like the frescoes that adorn the temple walls outside. The air was cool and quiet and inviting. We stopped to rest on a bench, when I noticed something wonderful. A scale model of the temple complex filled the center of the visitors’ center. It was huge, at least twenty feet across, with fine architectural details like brickwork, trees, and sand-swept bedrock. The model presented the temple complex as it appeared, in its entirety, before monotheism and time took their toll. I inspected the model for a long while, lost in the detailed complexity of the ruins that stood just outside. Teresa moved on to the photography exhibit. The images dated back to the nineteenth century and showed the complex in various stages of excavation and restoration. The prints confirmed what the scale model suggested: that the temple complex spread across the valley for miles, and we would be busy that day.

We entered a security checkpoint on the far side of the visitors’ center. A lone security officer manned the metal detector and X-ray machine. The poor fellow was half-asleep and I felt bad for disturbing him. He must have been up since two or three o’clock that morning, when he enjoyed his suhoor, that last meal before the day’s fast. Then he would have gone to a mosque for Fajr, the dawn prayer, sometime around five o’clock. Then, while much of Egypt slept through the day, this fellow went to work, to guard the temple complex, from us, and for us. We were the only visitors in the center that morning, and I appreciated our personal security detail. (In June 2015, a trio of armed suicide bombers stormed the complex, but they were killed by police within a few minutes.) The officer searched Teresa’s bag, waved us through the X-ray machine, and pointed to an exit door. We stepped outside where we expected to find a ticket booth. Instead, we found Mohamed.

“Hello, I am Mohamed,” a voice called out. The sky was so bright that we could barely see, and the disembodied voice surprised us. When our eyes adjusted to the sun, we found the speaker: an older fellow, short and squat, sat on a bench across from the doorway, in the shade. He wore a white baseball cap, button-up shirt, and slacks, and he looked very much like a high school teacher waiting to lead a class on a field trip. He stood and pointed at a badge clipped to his shirt. “I am a licensed tour guide. I have a degree in Egyptology from Cairo University, and I can teach you everything about the temples. Please, one hundred pounds per hour, and two hours at least recommended.”

We hadn’t thought about hiring a tour guide at Karnak. Our guidebook included detailed maps and three-dimensional drawings of the temple complex along with several pages of descriptive history and analyses. Teresa thought it would suffice, but I was less sure. I thought about the model inside the visitors’ center. It showed a vast site, larger and even more complex than the pyramids at Giza, but Teresa didn’t care. She marched toward the temple walls. “No, I don’t want a guide,” she said.

“But his English was solid,” I argued, “and he sounds sincere.”

“Sayid sounded pretty good, too,” Teresa countered.

“Eighty pounds per hour, the complex is very big, there is a lot to learn.” Mohamed called after us.

Teresa shook her head. She wanted to explore the site alone and continued the long march to the temple.

“Sixty pounds. For one hour I will give you the highlights.” Mohamed was desperate.

I jogged after Teresa and told her that sixty pounds was more than fair, and after the quick tour, we could roam the site by ourselves for a few more hours if she wanted. Teresa sighed. She insisted that I had to deal with Mohamed, and if he annoyed her, she would leave us behind. I jogged back to Mohamed, who, by then, had returned to his bench, in the shade under a tree. I told him about Sayid, and I described our visit to the pyramids. I asked him about his qualifications. Mohamed earned his degree thirty years ago, he told me, and since then had worked on archaeological digs around Egypt. He learned English (and German and French and some Russian) from tourists over the last few decades.

“Yes, please,” I said, “one hour would be fine. It is too hot for much more than that.” The extreme heat was just an excuse, a preemptory strike to rid ourselves of Mohamed if he proved to be another hustler.

Mohamed leapt to his feet and led us across an ancient plaza, between the visitors’ center and the temple complex. He launched into a practiced lecture, and he described what we would find inside the complex. Karnak, he explained, was the religious center of the ancient city of Thebes. The Egyptians didn’t call it Thebes then, the Greeks came up with that name much later. The complex, he explained in exquisite detail, is divided into four precincts, each dedicated to a particular god: Aten, Mut, Montu, and Amen-Ra. Amenhotep IV worshipped Aten, an obscure sun god, and built temples and shrines in his honor. He even changed his name to Akhenaten, an homage to the new religion that he, and he alone, professed. Aten’s precinct included a colonnade, courtyard, and colossal statues of the pharaoh and his queen Nefertiti. Atenism, a form of monotheism, was very unpopular among Egyptians, most of whom practiced polytheism, and the precinct was disassembled shortly after Akhenaten died. Mohamed also described the other three precincts in great detail. He rattled off names, dates, occupations, and features like a walking encyclopedia. I listened and scribbled notes while Teresa skimmed our guidebook to confirm the details. Mohamed spoke and walked quickly. Teresa and I had trouble matching his pace. He wasn’t in a hurry, he apologized, there was just a lot to see.

Mohamed stopped in the middle of the plaza and pointed up to a pair of towers that loomed overhead. The stone towers were a hundred feet high and fifty feet thick at their bases. This was the First Pylon, he explained, the gate that protected the shrines and temples. There are large, vertical slits set into the pylon walls. They once held towering flagstaffs topped with colorful banners. We crossed over the threshold between the towers, and into the temple complex. A stone enclosure wall once circled the entire complex, but most of it is ruins now. Mohamed pointed to a tall mound of mud bricks that leaned against the rear of one tower. The bricks once formed a massive stone and earth ramp to the top of the towers. “No aliens,” he joked, “just sandstone and ramps and muscles build the towers.”

Mohamed led us to a soaring, stone wall on the edge of another courtyard. “This is called the Bubastite Portal. It is a wall and a gate built in the tenth century BC, for Shoshenq I,” he explained. “The engravings show military campaigns in Judea (Israel) and they list one hundred fifty-six towns that Shoshenq defeated in his conquest. Have you read the Bible?”

“Very little,” I confessed.

“In school,” Teresa said.

Mohamed described a story, in the second Book of Chronicles, that tells of an Egyptian king who attacked Jerusalem with 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and countless soldiers. “The inscriptions tell the same story,” he said, “like newspapers of today.” In cooler weather, I might have debated the idea of journalistic integrity through the ages, but, as Mohamed wiped the sweat from his brow, I decided we should hurry.

We passed through the Second Pylon. Its sandstone bricks lie in piles of rubble in the courtyard. Many of the bricks, Mohamed explained, were drawn from other monuments around Egypt, including thousands of talatat blocks (small sandstone blocks of uniform size) from other temples. The pharaohs liked to recycle, and they rarely had much respect for their forebears. Despite the damage, we could still see hundreds of reliefs carved in the towers high overhead, but Mohamed told us that the images are not original to Horemheb, the pharaoh who built the pylon. Instead, Ramses I, who completed the pylon, removed Horemheb’s cartouches and replaced them with his own. Then his grandson, Ramses II, destroyed those cartouches and replaced them with his own. Centuries later, during the reign of Ptolemy VI, when a fire destroyed part of the pylon, including its roof, sculptors recreated many of the cartouches using classical designs, but with various degrees of success. We stopped to inspect the designs, but Mohamed was in a hurry. “There is much to see, please, hurry!” Mohamed called.

He led us to the Great Hypostyle Hall, a massive ceremonial room enclosed on all sides and roofed with massive slabs of stone, each the size of a car. Its roof collapsed centuries ago, and many of the slabs were carted off for other construction projects. Most of the columns, however, survived, in various states of decay.

“The columns,” Mohamed said, “include a plinth (base), shaft, capital, and abacus. Across the abaci, stone architraves bore the weight of the heavy roof.”

I wondered how many cranes it would take to recreate the hall today, and how many union workers. I wanted to ask about the ramps or ropes that carried the stones to the roof, but Mohamed had moved on.

“Unlike obelisks, columns are not carved in one piece. Most were assembled here from smaller blocks. Workers stacked slabs of stone and round them afterward.” Mohamed was especially interested in the symbolism represented by two column styles: open (blooming) papyrus and closed (dormant) papyrus. Each column has a smooth, cylindrical shaft, but the former are topped with an inverted-bell-shaped capital, while the latter have wine-glass-shaped capitals. To me, the difference was purely aesthetic, but Mohamed assured us that there was deep, philosophical meaning here. “Of the one hundred thirty-four columns, twelve have the blooming papyrus design, meaning life,” he said. These columns are much larger than the rest, seventy feet tall, and they form parallel rows in the center of the hall. “The other columns have the closed papyrus design, representing rest, or afterlife.” Mohamed continued for several minutes. He told us, rapidly, the story of the engravings that decorate the columns, but I was overwhelmed. I turned my eyes upward and tried to photograph the columns against the deep blue sky.

We passed through several more pylons, which Mohamed explained are named not for the order in which they were constructed, but for their order west-to-east, and north-to-south. Then we entered the Palace of Ma’at, which was constructed under the direction of Hatshepsut. Her son, Thutmose III, resented her reign and ordered her cartouches destroyed or covered with other stones, and those new stones were inscribed with the great deeds of the bitter son. Mohamed explained the animosity as we walked along, but I was busy staring at the haunting figures all around us. We passed dozens of statues, many of which were toppled or defaced, if not destroyed outright. Often, the only remnant was a foot or pair of legs. These were the torsos and limbs of the statues that the Muslims encountered a thousand years ago. They saw only the heads, but we saw only the bodies. I asked Mohamed about the stone corpses.

“Yes, in early years, some people were upset. The temples show pagan gods. They say širk, idols are forbidden, the Muslims want only Allah, they call it tawhid, one god. Some Muslims scratch the faces or cut off the heads. But look, the statues are still here and we can learn. See, several styles: seated, standing, and walking. And see also a second figure, a woman, maybe the pharaoh’s wife, mother, or sister (often the same person), carved between the legs of the pharaohs? The female figures were always much smaller than those of the pharaohs. See, they come only to the knees of their male counterparts,” Mohamed explained. “This showed that the pharaohs loved the women enough to remember them, but not to say they are equals.”

Mohamed led us down an alley between the temples. He pointed up, to the walls near the roofline. “See the marks scratched in the walls? A thousand years ago, the sand covered the temples to there. The Christians leaned their tents against the walls and pylons, and they sharpened their knives against the sandstone. So, it is not just Muslims, it is Romans and Christians and everyone. The temples need protection, from Egyptians, too. Look, you will see the names and pictures of Akhenaten and Hatshepsut scratched from the surfaces. They want us to forget, but we remember.” Mohamed led us through another hall where he pointed to ghostly gaps in the frescoes, where the forsaken names were redacted in an ancient Egyptian version of damnatio memoriae. “The names are gone now. They do the same to Mubarek. Once, his name and photograph was everywhere: squares, offices, schools. Now, no one will say his name. And your people, Europeans, they come here, too, and they take the stones and the statues and the obelisks for museums, sometimes for private collection, and some leave their marks. Look, and you will see, they are very easy to find.”

Mohamed was right, of course. I had noticed a column, earlier, engraved with a dozen names and dates: W. Darby, AL Corry, and JW Dunlop 1843 among others. One vandal’s name stood out, for its penmanship and size: JOHN GORDON 1804. His name, the size of which would please John Hancock, was carved in perfect block letters, at least six inches high, and a full ten feet off the ground, from a time when the sand and silt filled the halls. In fact, engravings like these are so common that they merit their own field of inquiry. Roger O. De Keersmaecker, a photographer from the Belgian Congo, catalogued and researched thousands of engravings in a series of books like Traveller’s Graffiti from Egypt and the Sudan.

We stopped in the shade of Akhmenu, a large temple, built during the reign of Thutmose III, at the east end of Karnak. Several large sections of the roof have survived the ages, and Mohamed used our short break to describe the architecture and its meaning. The ceiling is painted dark blue and adorned with golden, five-point stars, representing the night sky, like the one under which a pharaoh would sleep in the desert, perhaps during a military campaign. The roof in the heret-ib (central hall) is supported with tent-pole columns, an unusual design in which the meeting point between the shaft and capital pinches outward, like a discus.

“The columns represent the very tents in which the pharaoh slept,” Mohamed said, “because nature was very important in ancient Egypt and they wanted to immortalize the nature scene. The walls of the ‘botanical room’ (in a far corner of the temple) show plants and animals the pharaoh saw during his campaigns.”

Next, Mohamed led us to a small room off the central hall. The area was cordoned off by a small gate, and guarded by a tall, elderly fellow in a grey djellaba. Mohamed asked me for two pounds to bribe the guard. The guard demanded more money, but Mohamed refused. “All he did was open a gate, he deserves nothing,” Mohamed complained. Behind the gate, Mohamed showed us a small room, its walls inscribed with hundreds of images. He directed Teresa to stand in a particular spot and told her to cup her hands and raise them toward her face. At first, she was confused, but soon she realized that a beam of sunlight, pouring through a slit in the walls high above, shone directly in the palms of her hand. It looked very much like she was holding the sun itself, and she smiled widely.

Outside, Mohamed pointed to an ancient, but artificial, sacred lake, once fed by ground water and used in religious ceremonies. Priests floated model barques in its waters and it was home to Amen’s sacred geese. Mohamed explained that, at one time, the lake was probably surrounded by paving stones and palm or date trees. I imagine it must have looked much like the stately pool at Mena House, but today, surrounded by the crumbling walls of so many temples and pylons, the lake looks like a dilapidated public pool, its murky water ringed by walls of cracked stone.

I stopped to admire a large red granite statue of a scarab beetle. Beautifully restored and set upon a high pedestal, the sculpted insect is at least four feet long. Mohamed used the short break to tell us about the obelisks off to our right, but my mind was full and I only half heard the story. “There were once seventeen obelisks at Karnak,” he began, but I couldn’t hear the rest.

As we walked around the complex, Mohamed scanned the ground for small stones. He picked up several specimens and showed them to us. They looked exactly like small stones to me: grey and roundish. Mohamed knew better. When he crushed the stones against the ground, they crumbled into a colorful dust, like magic chalk. He asked Teresa to hold out her hand, and she obliged. “Each stone,” he said, “reveals a new color.” Mohamed wiped the pigmented dust on the back of Teresa’s hand: yellow, red, brown, black, and purple; rich earth tones that looked a lot like make-up, but they also matched the colors on the walls around us. “People ask how they paint the walls and ceilings. Most of the time, it is from here, the stones. Other colors come from plants,” he explained.

We walked back through the Great Hypostyle Hall and stopped in the shade of the columns to rest. Mohamed used the respite to describe the architecture. “The columns were covered in a…” This time he was interrupted. For the first time that morning, we spotted other visitors at the complex: a woman and her daughter, dressed in dark abayas. The woman spoke to Mohamed for a moment while Teresa and I stared up at the massive columns overhead. “The woman thinks you are very beautiful,” he told Teresa, “and she would like you to pose with them for a photograph.” Embarrassed but flattered, Teresa agreed and Mohamed snapped several frames with the woman’s camera. Then Mohamed continued his lecture as though the interruption never happened, “…single band of engravings till…”

Mohamed always walked as he talked and suddenly we were outside the First Pylon, surrounded by sphinxes, where our one-hour tour started two hours earlier. Mohamed offered to take us around again, but we declined. We were exhausted, physically and mentally, and needed to decompress. Mohamed asked whether we were happy with our tour, and asked if we would like to tour the Valley of the Kings on the left bank of the Nile. His sales pitch was practiced and specific: three sites, including transportation to and from our hotel. He rattled off a list of sites, their entrance fees, and other fine details. The entire trip, he told us, would take four or five hours, depending on our interest, and should start as early in the day as possible to avoid the extreme heat. Teresa and I nodded with enthusiasm. We agreed to meet, at our hotel, in two days.

“Make sure you charge your camera,” Mohamed said. “There’s much to see.”

Teresa wanted to tour the temple again, on our own, and even though I was exhausted I agreed. We crossed the plaza, between the sphinxes, and marched through the pylons, through the courtyards, among headless statues, around the lake, and past the scarab beetle. When we returned to the Great Hypostyle Hall, at the end of our second tour, we found three groups in the shade of the columns. Each of the foreigners wore the unofficial uniform of tourists in Egypt: backpack, shorts, tank top, sunglasses, hat, camera, sunburn, sweat, and bottle of water. From the accents, we guessed the groups were Russian, Dutch, and Japanese, and each group was led by a middle-aged Egyptian tour guide fluent in the languages de rigueur. The children squatted on the plinths or leaned against the columns and rested their bare skin against the cool stones. The adults rocked on their heels, fanned themselves with pamphlets, and tried to listen to their guides. If their guides were half as good as Mohamed, then they were in for a long afternoon.

We hailed a taxi back to the hotel. The driver, a robust fellow with a huge laugh, dressed his car to fit a king. The seats were covered in charcoal grey cloth with a deep pile, almost shaggy, and the dashboard was lined with bobbleheads and a string of flashing, green and white lights. His stereo system, an aftermarket model, included large speakers in the rear deck and in all four doors. Teresa, who by then loved everything about Luxor, asked the driver to play some Egyptian pop music. He didn’t quite understand her request at first, but when he realized what she wanted he happily obliged, at full volume. It was the one time on our trip that I wished the driver would go faster.

Later that afternoon, Teresa and I dreamt of dinner, and decided on a quick walk through Little Britain. As expected, most restaurants were closed, and we settled, instead, on packaged snacks from Arkwrights. The shop is an anomaly, even by the standards of Little Britain. Arkwrights caters to European tourists; its large signs, printed in block letters, advertise Gourmet Food. The shop could pass for a very clean 7-Eleven, or even a small Tesco. Its large, plate-glass windows flood the store with natural light, and its white and black tile floors sparkle. European and American brands like Cadbury, Nestlè, Lays, Red Bull, Coke, and Pepsi fill the shelves. Arkwrights also sells familiar household products like pet food and dish soap that can be hard to find in many neighborhoods. The operator was a friendly, middle-aged fellow with a bit of a paunch and a bright smile. We often found him sitting at his register, staring at the television perched over the drink cooler at the front of the shop. He always greeted us with a smile and sincere hello. That day we treated ourselves to a couple sandwiches, made-to-order. I tried the tuna on white, and Teresa had the chicken salad. Weary of long days with no restaurants, we also bought several bags of chips, candies, bottles of water, and sodas to get us through our visit to Luxor.

The rest of that evening was routine. We showered, washed our laundry in the sink, charged the camera batteries, and checked our e-mail. We ate dinner in our room, and the sandwiches were quite good, and certainly worth the money. The sun set behind the cliffs of the left bank and the country came to life while we were tucked in bed.



⁂



Mohamed met us in the lobby, two days later, at seven o’clock sharp. When we stepped off the elevator, we saw him in a chair by the front desk, his white baseball hat in his hand. As soon as he noticed us, he jumped up and led us out the rear door and across the hotel’s riverfront patio to the private dock. Once again, he was in a hurry, and his tour started the moment we stepped through the door.

“Mubarek,” he said with derision, “was friends with the hotel owners and allowed them to extend their property by fifty feet into the river. So they could build a helipad.” He pointed toward the wide green patio in front of us. “But there are no helicopters now.” Mohamed smiled at his joke, but he was right, there were no helicopters, and Mubarek was then in jail.

Mohamed led us to a motorized tour boat; its captain was a tall, slender man, about twenty years old, dressed in a light-grey djellaba. The boat, lined with metal benches, had room for twenty-five passengers at least, and its deck was enclosed by a white canopy. We were the only passengers that day, and we sat on opposite benches to balance the load. Mohamed continued his tour as we pulled away from the dock.

“Thirty thousand years ago, this was a dry valley of gravel and sand. The Nile was then some miles to the west of here, in what is now the Western Desert. Then the desert was a green valley with a forest that fed animals like gazelle (and the cheetahs that fed on the gazelles). But for some years, there was a drought and the riverbed silted over. When the rains returned, the river couldn’t push through its old course, so it turned east, and formed the Nile Valley we know today. Before it moved, the river fed aquifers deep underground, and that’s where we now see the oases of Dakhla, Kharga, and Siwa. In those days, the river drained into the Mediterranean a hundred miles west of Alexandria.”

Our captain piloted the boat slowly west across the river, as the currents simultaneously carried us north. Ten minutes later, we reached a dock on the left bank. It was a smooth crossing, and there was no other traffic on the river that morning. We climbed off the boat (I banged my head as I always do), and up a ramp to a small, tree-lined parking lot. Half a dozen taxis waited at the curb, their drivers asleep at the wheel. Mohamed asked us to wait while he made a phone call, and a few minutes later a white minibus pulled up. “Our private tour bus for the day,” Mohamed announced.

Architecture on the left bank looks very little like its counterpart to the east. The streets of Geziret-El-Beirat, a small village nestled right along the river, are narrow and paved with hard-packed soil and pasted with wind-blown dust. The buildings – houses, inns, shops, and markets – are much smaller than those in Luxor. Here, they stand only one or two stories and they’re painted in greens, blues, and gold. Except for all the rocks and chunks of black earth that litter the streets, the town was very tidy. There were no mounds of garbage or rusted car wrecks. This small town, I imagine, is what most of Egypt looked like fifty years ago, when the country’s population was half what it is today. Next, we passed a small settlement that Mohamed called New Gourna, a planned housing development built after the Second World War to resettle the Gournawi, an ethnic group that settled on the left bank in the sixteenth century. (Also called Qurnawi, the group is named for a nearby promontory Qurn, meaning forehead or pinnacle.) They built their houses directly in and over the ancient tombs that we would visit that day, and though they have helped archaeologists, including Howard Carter, find dozens of ancient sites, they are infamous for grave robbing. The village, designed by famed Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy, is built of mud brick and other sustainable materials. It was, Fathy argued, to be a model village for future development across Egypt and an antidote to “matchbook” concrete apartment blocks. The idea never caught on, and today the village crumbles around hundreds of people who still live there.

Traffic that morning was light, and we passed more scooters and donkey-pulled trailers than cars or trucks. The housing developments quickly gave way to green fields of sugar cane and fig and date trees. I asked Mohamed about the production of cash crops like cotton and tobacco, but I don’t think he understood my question. The driver pulled off to the right side of the road, and there we had what we call our Jurassic Park moment. There is a scene, early in that film, where the visiting scientists – Grant, Malcolm, and Sattler – first set eyes on a living dinosaur. Naturally, they are quite surprised by what they see, and they turn into weak-kneed children at the sight. Teresa and I experienced a similar thrill when our driver turned off the road. There, in a green field, enclosed by a flimsy wire, stood the mighty Colossi of Memnon.

Erected in the fourteenth century BC, of sandstone quarried in Lower Egypt, the twin statues depict Amenhotep III seated on thrones at the gates to what was once the largest and most opulent temple in Egypt. The pedestals alone, half-buried in silt, rise more than ten feet, and the statues’ heads, draped with headdresses called the Nemes, reach sixty feet high. By then we had seen the pyramids of Giza and the temples of Karnak, but in those places, the statues and monuments seemed proportionate to the next. The Colossi, of which we had read a bit, appeared suddenly and seemingly in the middle of nowhere. Surrounded by an empty field, they were literally giants. Though now cracked and defaced, the imposing, megalithic statues look as though they were airlifted by helicopters – large helicopters – and left there as a warning to invading forces. There are few other signs of the massive temple complex that stood here for centuries. It was built on the immediate floodplain of the Nile and suffered catastrophic damage within a few centuries. Today, other than the Colossi, the grounds are marked by a handful of foundation walls, smaller statues and a few sphinxes, all dredged from the surrounding fields, and left to dry on temporary pedestals. (Though we now know the statues depict a pharaoh of the New Kingdom, early Greek explorers believed the monuments depicted Memnon, a mythical king and hero of the Trojan Wars.)

We followed Mohamed across the short driveway and over to the statues. Along the way, I snapped several photographs and two in particular illustrate the majesty of the Colossi. In the first image, I framed the twin statues, alone against the horizon. In the second image, Teresa stands at the foot of the northern statue; she is dwarfed against the massive stone blocks, her head barely rises above the pedestal. Both statues are in rough shape. They look much like The Thing from Marvel Comic’s Fantastic Four; the torsos and legs are cracked and splayed like the boulders of an eroding hillside. The northern statue collapsed during an earthquake in the first century BC, and its base, for two centuries thereafter, moaned and whistled with the rising sun. The sounds drew curious observers including Roman Emperor Septimius Severus who visited the site around AD 196. During the emperor’s visit, the Colossi were quiet. Fearing some unknown transgression on his part, Severus appeased the gods by rebuilding the northern statue. His masons assembled five courses of sandstone blocks to approximate the shape and size of the original statue, but the Colossi never sang again.

Archaeologists often debate the opposing values of preservation and renovation, so, on our walk back to the waiting taxi, I asked Mohamed what he thought of renovating and rebuilding ancient artifacts like the Colossi.

“It’s good for the economy,” he said. “It brings tourists and supports our jobs. Besides, if it’s done right, maybe the statues will last much longer.”

From the Colossi, we drove to the Temple of Hatshepsut, known in ancient Egypt as Djeser-Djeseru (Holiest of Holies). The temple stands at the foot of a high cliff and is surrounded on the west and north by natural rock walls, hundreds of feet high. The southern walls abut an older, crumbling, mortuary temple built for Mentuhotep II, an Eleventh Dynasty pharaoh. The temple sits due west of the complex at Karnak, and a long causeway, graced on either side by columns of sphinxes bearing the face of Hatshepsut, probably linked the temple to the Nile’s left bank.

On our way to Hatshepsut’s temple, Mohamed taught us an important lesson. “Do you want an easy way to remember the pharaoh’s name? Just ask yourself, what do you wear in the desert? A hat … and a cheap suit!” We all laughed.

The road through the valleys is paved with jet-black asphalt and surrounded by pale, yellow dust and sand. In years past, excavation debris, construction material, household garbage, and medical waste littered the road, but all that was gone by our visit. The ride from the dock lasted about twenty minutes and, with the air-conditioning set on high, it was quite pleasant. In cooler weather, we could have easily walked across the valley in less than an hour. We may even have climbed over the hills to reach the Valley of the Kings as our guidebook suggested, but the forecast threatened 115 degrees in the shade. Save something for next time, I thought.

On either side of the road, we saw archaeological sites including the massive Ramesseum. Mohamed described everything in fine detail; in fact, he never stopped speaking, and I struggled to follow the long history he set before us. Instead, I stared out the window at the old Gournawi villages set in the hills all around us. One or two stories tall, the mud brick structures, painted in light blues and beiges, had seen better days. Mohamed said the government refused to help the residents with repairs or services; they were squatters who would never leave. I later read that the Egyptian government, a decade earlier, habitually bulldozed the old buildings, forcibly relocating the residents. That was under Mubarek’s regime. I wanted to ask Mohamed if he thought things would change since the revolution, but he busily described our next stop: Deir el-Bahari (Monastery of the Sea).

Mohamed led us to a large visitors’ center where Teresa and I admired the large scale-model of Hatshepsut’s temple. The temple, fronted by rows of pillars and spread over three tiers, looks much like three harmonicas stacked on top of each other, except the second level is a bit smaller than the first, and third is a bit smaller than the second. The model showed the sandstone temple in fine detail including statues, columns, halls, trees, and ramps. The lowest two levels of the temple, protected under sand for thousands of years, are very well-preserved. The long ramps that connect the levels are modern recreations, and the facades have been restored with modern sandstone and marble, but other than that, they look original. The top level, however, was exposed to erosion and rockslides for centuries and restoration work continues.

Mohamed led us back outside where we boarded the tuf-tuf, which is just a silly-looking train of glorified golf carts pulled by a small diesel tractor. It was a short ride to the temple gate, but, even seated in the shade of the carts, we were too hot. Mohamed handed over our entrance and tuf-tuf tickets, and drew our attention to the price. (His fee included all admission and transportation costs as well as tips for our driver and boat captain; he wanted to make sure we understood his costs.) We were the only passengers that morning, and a minute later, as we jumped off the train, Mohamed launched into his lecture. While he spoke, I turned around and looked back. The tuf-tuf had carried us a few hundred feet across the parking lot. It seemed like a silly luxury.

A hapless merchant had followed us across the parking lot. He offered scarves and plastic trinkets, but Mohamed was in full swing; he shooed the fellow away with one hand while he pontificated with the other.

“Most tour guides are in a hurry,” he said. “They race up to the third level of the temple, point to a few inscriptions, and run back to the air-conditioned buses. They wholly miss the significance of the site. Here, for example, look.” Mohamed pointed at two shallow holes in the ground, one on either side of the stone path. In each hole was a rounded stump of an ancient tree, which, to us, looked like brown rocks. In fact, they were petrified remains of parallel columns of shade trees that lined the processional way from the river.

Mohamed then led us through the ground level of the temple and described the paintings, reliefs, and statues, many of which were well preserved. He reached into his pocket and produced a small mirror that he used like a laser pointer, reflecting the sun’s rays and pointing them at the walls (covered in red and gold and green murals) and ceilings (painted with the familiar dark blue sky and golden, five-point stars). Many scenes represent agriculture and animal husbandry, and one relief showed a young Hatshepsut suckling directly from the teat of a cow (the goddess Hathor in her bovine form). Mohamed, out of breath and sweating profusely, explained, in painful detail, each mural, with names, dates, facts, figures, and the historical significance of every image.

We trekked up the long ramp to the second tier while Mohamed described the condition of the temple.

“Until a hundred years ago the temple was covered in sand and silt up to here.” Mohamed stopped at the top of the ramp and held his hand high above his head to indicate the old surface level. “So the lowest level is well preserved because the people who lived here did not care about the ruins. To them it was shelter and defense. They would never waste their time digging in the sand; there was no gold in here. So the sand protected the columns and frescoes so they look fresh, their colors are bright. Early Christians lived here, in the temple, on the second and third levels. The columns and dark hallways provided a bit of shade,” Mohamed said, and he removed his baseball hat and wiped his brow with a handkerchief.

By then, we were all soaked in sweat. Teresa produced a bag of throat lozenges to soothe our dry throats. Mohamed politely refused. During Ramadan, nothing can pass through his lips before sunset, not even a throat lozenge, he explained.

“But they’re medicinal, isn’t there an exception for that?” Teresa asked.

“There’s an exception for sick people, but I am not sick, just hot.” Mohamed smiled at Teresa’s offer, which he clearly appreciated, but which he could not accept. We waited till he turned away to open ours.

Mohamed led us up to the third tier where he described the ancient monastery, built during the sixth or seventh century, that filled the courtyard, and for which the site is named. The top level of Hatshepsut’s temple is in the midst of a lengthy restoration project so our time there was short. On our way back down Mohamed stopped to describe the work in progress. He pointed at a series of statues: Hatshepsut standing in front of the stone pillars on the second level; they hold ankhs, with their arms crossed over their chests.

“Hatshepsut’s name and image,” he said, “were proscribed by her son and successor, so many of her statues were defaced and tossed into open pits around the temple.” Most of those statues, which once graced the eastern face of the porticos, were stolen over the last century, or placed in museums; of those that remain, most are largely restored with modern materials.

Next, he described the statues of vultures, also recently restored.

“The heads and wings,” he said, “show the original details like feathers and beaks. The restoration work is smooth sandstone cement, and because it’s so much newer, it hasn’t aged from sunlight. See? Just look for the difference in color. Look. They fill in the cracks. They fill in the holes.”

Suddenly, the recent restoration projects around the temple became obvious, and I couldn’t help but notice the difference between the original work and the modern reconstruction material. Mohamed’s words rang in my head. They fill in the holes. I closed my eyes. I had to stop looking at the details because I didn’t want to see the holes that I knew were there, filled with cement like a million other cracks in the walls. The night before, I had read about a terrorist attack at the temple. I hadn’t mentioned it to Teresa, and I tried not think about it on our visit, but Mohamed’s attention to detail was too great.

On the morning of November 17, 1997, six men, dressed all in black, perhaps to mimic Egyptian security forces, stormed the Temple of Hatshepsut. They were armed with automatic rifles, butcher knives, and machetes, which they used to shoot, disembowel, dismember, or behead dozens of tourists and their guides. For nearly an hour, the heavily armed terrorists chased people around the columns and pillars, through the porticos and halls, into chambers and inescapable corners. Some witnesses recalled that the terrorists sang and laughed while they chased and murdered their victims. (Sixty-two people were killed and dozens more injured in the attack.) The attackers then hijacked a tour bus from the parking lot, and demanded that the driver take them to a second site, where they, presumably, intended to continue their carnage. The driver refused their demands and was severely beaten during the hijacking. Minutes later, the bus was stopped at a police checkpoint, and during the firefight that followed, one of the terrorists was killed. The other five, still heavily armed, escaped into the hills around the Valley of the Queens. For the next ninety minutes, the police, and several civilians, chased the attackers, eventually killing all five.

Most of the victims were found huddled in the colonnade halls at the rear of the First Terrace (second level), from which there was little chance of escape. The attack left bullet holes in the columns and walls, but the holes have been patched. (They fill in the holes.) Mubarek visited the temple the day after the attack and held a press conference to announce increased security measures at historic sites around Luxor and much of Egypt. By then, the bloody floors were mopped clean and covered with tons of sand to hide the bloodstains from the press.

As we climbed the ramps from terrace to terrace, and as we toured the ancient halls and admired the reliefs and frescoes, I imagined myself there on that day in 1997. What was it like for those unsuspecting tourists, as they followed their guides through the ruins? What did they hear? I knew the answer; I had read the witness statements. They heard blood-curdling screams, crying, and gun shots. What did they see? They saw their friends, spouses, and children shot in the head; some were later beheaded, others slashed and disemboweled. There were pools of blood on the ground, and human flesh plastered the walls. If it happened again, during our visit, where would we run? The attackers approached from the ground level, and raced up the ramps to the upper terraces. I suppose it was instinct that encouraged most of the victims that day to run away from the attackers, toward the rear of the Middle Court. They found no exit there, and no refuge. I wanted to ask Mohamed about the attacks. I wondered if he were there that day. I wondered what he would have done if he were.

I had fallen behind again. Mohamed and Teresa were at the bottom ramp, a hundred feet ahead of me. They were having a great time. Teresa was blissfully unaware of the attack. I shook the morbid images from my mind. It was a beautiful, scorching hot day, and we were safe.

We rode the tuf-tuf back to the visitors’ center where our driver waited for us. A minute later, we were back on the black asphalt road, this time headed to the Valley of the Kings. We turned and the road slipped into a steep-sided canyon; high cliff walls loomed overhead. There was no other traffic and our driver took advantage of the open road. We careened across both lanes and turned corners far too quickly and right past a road sign that read: Reduce Speed. For centuries, intrepid explorers have hiked through these valleys to visit the tombs, and the idea teased my mind more than once. Earlier that day, seeing the sleepy village along the left bank, I thought it would be fun to try walking to the tombs like our forebears, but now all I could imagine was getting crushed by a speeding taxi. The heat was dangerous, but the drivers are deadly.

We soon reached the Valley of the Kings visitors’ center where Mohamed, once again, bought our tickets. (As a licensed guide, he was exempt from entrance fees.) While we waited for him, Teresa and I stopped to look at the scale model of the tombs; it was the most remarkable model yet. A large platform filled the center of the room; its frosted glass surface was illuminated from below by soft white lights. A thick sheet of opaque acrylic, molded into an exact, three-dimensional replica of the valley, hovered over the platform, suspended by barely visible plastic legs at each corner. Its detail was incredible. The model showed every rolling hill, every cliff face, every crack, and every crevice in the valley. Dozens of tiny flags marked dozens of tombs in the valley. The real magic was under that acrylic molding. When we knelt down, we could see under the model, where the model makers included scale replicas of the underground tombs and the tunnels that led to them. Again, the detail was incredible. The plastic tunnels, thin and delicate like dry spaghetti, dipped and twisted, then opened into wide antechambers, and narrowed into claustrophobic corridors. Like their counterparts in the hillside outside, the model tunnels sometimes dead-ended into unfinished rock walls, and other times opened into massive caverns. A few minutes later, we would climb down those very tunnels and stand in those chambers.

Mohamed met us by the door; it was time to go. We hopped aboard another tuf-tuf, but this time we waited an extra minute for a family of Spanish tourists, dressed immodestly in short shorts and tank tops. Mohamed, never one to let a moment pass without a fact or anecdote, used the short break to tell us about the valley.

“In ancient Egypt, this valley was called Ta-sekhet-ma'at, which means the Great Field. The name refers to all the lands west of Thebes, where the tombs were carved in the hills. In Arabic we call this land Wadi Biban al-Molouk which simply means Valley of the Kings.”

Once again, the ride to the gate was only a few hundred feet, but by then it was about 110 degrees so we didn’t argue. As we jumped off the cart, Mohamed directed us to check our camera at the gate, and he emphatically warned us not to tip the clerks or guards anywhere in the valley. “They do nothing for their money, all they want is baksheesh,” he said. Mohamed told us that we would visit three tombs in the valley that day, but, because of overcrowding, guides are not allowed to enter the tombs with the visitors. Instead, he led us to a map of the valley posted on the edge of the parking lot. Each tomb is marked by a black square and an alphanumeric designation (KV1, KV2, etc.), and a key at the bottom of the map decodes the abbreviations (the tombs of Ramses VII, Ramses IV, respectively).

Mohamed led us up a sloping, gravel path, between steep hills of crumbling limestone. It was a short hike, but we were all exhausted within a few minutes, and we were quite happy when, after a few minutes, Mohamed stopped in front of one tomb.

“This here is the entrance to the tomb of Tutankhamen. His name means ‘Living image of the god Amen.’ But we will not go inside his tomb; it is empty and there is nothing to see. Have you been to the Egyptian Museum?” We nodded in agreement. “Then you saw everything that there was in the tomb when it was opened in 1922. But today, it is unremarkable.”

There are dozens of known tombs in the Valley of the Kings (sixty-three to be exact), and, despite the name, only twenty-six tombs bore the remains of pharaohs; the rest held royals and aristocrats of various importance. Some are open to the public (admission fees vary; the pharaohs would have loved that), but others are closed for excavation or renovation. Some tombs, though well decorated with frescoes and carvings, included no material treasures; their mummified occupants expected to find all their needs met in the afterlife. These tombs have large openings, often surrounded by ornate sculptures. Most tombs, though, held mummies in sarcophagi surrounded by golden treasures and all the accoutrement one might need for eternity. The entranceways to these tombs were small, plain, and covered by boulders and tons of gravel to protect their contents from grave robbers. Despite the effort, most tombs have been repeatedly plundered for centuries, beginning in the pharaonic period. (That’s why Howard Carter’s discovery was so remarkable: Tutankhamen’s tomb included tons of artifacts and treasure.)

Some tombs, like that of Thutmose III, were carved high above the valley floor and are now reached by long flights of stairs. They would have been very difficult, but not impossible, to reach in antiquity. Most tombs wind down long, sloping corridors, with twists and turns at irregular intervals. Mohamed suggested the seemingly abstract tunnel designs were opportunistic; workmen often widened existing cracks and crevices, converting these natural fissures into chambers or halls. In at least three cases, workmen accidently broke through the walls of existing tunnels from older tombs (there were no maps to direct their efforts). In these cases, they covered up the unintended holes and continued in a different direction, or they incorporated the existing structures in their tunnels.

Construction was always difficult; not only was the work hot and dangerous, but the crews worked on a deadline. When the pharaoh (or relative or aristocrat) died, the tomb was effectively finished regardless of its condition. Some final touches may have been completed, but in general, work stopped shortly thereafter. The tomb of Ramses I, a pharaoh who ruled for only two years, is about 150 feet long. Ramses VII died suddenly, and his tomb converted an incomplete corridor into his burial chamber. By comparison, the tomb of Seti I is several hundred feet long. Size is great, but complexity matters, too. Some tombs are incredibly complete with antechambers and shrines and corridors. The tomb of Ramses II, a pharaoh known for his love of superlative monumental construction, includes at least a hundred thirty rooms and corridors, and may hold dozens more.

At the entrance to each tomb we visited, Mohamed stopped to describe what we would find inside. There was no template to tomb construction, he said, each features a unique design and impressive architecture. In most tombs, the walls and ceilings are painted or carved with exquisite details: battle scenes, trade, accounting, mythology, heritage, and nature. (Many of the nature scenes feature animals like hippopotami and giraffes that once roamed the wilds of Egypt.) Due to erosion and vandalism, sheets of Plexiglas protect the walls and some ceilings. Wooden planks cover the floors, including the sloping ramps down the long corridors, which make climbing in and out a bit easier. Dim light bulbs, powered by long stretches of electrical wire, hang from the ceilings. It’s a great improvement over the ancient system of oxygen-consuming oil lamps.

A guard, usually a local Egyptian man dressed in a blue or grey djellaba, stood at the entrance to each tomb and checked tickets. The guards carefully tear the tickets to show they have been used. In the larger tombs, a second or third guard looks after errant visitors who might be tempted to scratch their names in the ancient walls, smoke a cigarette, or relieve themselves in the far corners of the chambers. For those visitors who defy the No Cameras policy, the guards will usually look away for a few minutes, for a bit of baksheesh. In some tombs, where certain chambers and corridors are blocked by gates, the guards will happily show intrepid visitors what lurks in the darkness (usually a restoration or excavation in progress), again, for a small tip.

Satisfied that we knew everything he could teach us about each tomb, Mohamed sent us on our way while he sat outside, in a bit of shade whenever possible. We explored the tombs on our own. Immediately inside the tomb entrances the air temperature dropped by ten degrees or so, but the air was stale and heavy. We struggled to breathe while we marveled at the colorful illustrations and intricate engravings. Their craftsmanship equaled anything we had seen from Giza to Cairo to Luxor. Except here, the work was far better preserved; it looked much as it did during the New Kingdom. The colors were vivid though gaudy and repetitive. We walked carefully, and stopped to admire the scenes that covered every surface in the tombs. As we climbed slowly down the long, wooden ramps the air grew heavier and warmer. My tongue detected a faint metallic taste that I could neither recognize nor enjoy; it was acrid and grew increasingly unpleasant by the minute. The ramps descended deeper into the tombs, and we had to duck in some places to avoid the low ceilings (hard stone surfaces against which the ancient cutting tools were no match). Some of the tombs included large antechambers or side rooms that once held stacks of mummies and urns and clothing and papyri scrolls. Anything that wasn’t looted in antiquity has since been relocated to museums and warehouses around the world, Mohamed explained afterward. I asked whether they had “top men working on it right now” but he didn’t understand my cinematic reference (Major Eaton from Raiders of the Lost Ark).

We spent about ten minutes in each tomb, which doesn’t sound like much, but more than that would have been unbearable, and unnecessary. (A study conducted by the Theban Mapping Project in September 2004 showed that ten minutes was quite average.) Our cursory visits satisfied our intellectual curiosity, though we dearly wished we were among those brazen visitors who smuggled in a camera. Even though Mohamed tried his best to describe the illustrations in each tomb, they stretched for hundreds of feet and included symbolism and innuendo far beyond our understanding. Archaeologists have recorded the paintings and engravings, and published them in lengthy reports, on websites, and in books. They are readily available in research libraries around the world and curious readers could spend a lifetime admiring them.

Of the three tombs we visited in the Valley of the Kings that morning, each seemed deeper and longer than the last. By the third tomb, I could feel another asthma attack brewing in my chest. I struggled to climb up the steep ramps, and took a few breaks along the way, feigning some great interest in whichever illustration next to which I happened to stop. “I wonder what happened here,” I said. I pointed at the lower section of the walls where the frescoes were worn off, and the bare limestone walls exposed. “Let’s find Mohamed and ask him,” I said between deep gulps of chalky air.

We found Mohamed in the shade of a visitors’ rest shelter; his legs swung from the bench like a child at a playground. He jumped up and led us back through the valley, toward the visitors’ center where our taxi waited. Mohamed, weak from fasting in the extreme heat, also struggled with each step. We popped handfuls of fruit-flavored Mentos into our mouths whenever he turned away. The tart candies made my mouth salivate, and I longed for a tall glass of ice water.

“What happened to the walls? Some of them are damaged, near the floor,” Teresa asked.

Mohamed wiped his brow, and answered in short, halting phrases. “The Greeks and Christians, they lived in the tombs, they sat on the ground and leaned against the wall, it wore off the paint. And the soot, from their fires, destroyed some of the pictures. Other tombs, lower in the wadi, the valley, they flooded in ancient times. The water destroyed the frescoes.”

“How do they find the tombs? Do they use radar?” Teresa asked on our walk across the parking lot.

“Yes, now they use radar,” Mohamed said between deep breaths, “but most of the tombs were found years ago. There are a few pharaohs we cannot find, but maybe one day.” For once, Mohamed was quiet; he was clearly exhausted and dehydrated, and we continued in silence.

We had one more stop on our tour that day: the Valley of the Nobles (which is not a valley in any sense). Our driver tore down the road. Teresa braced herself against the seat in front of her, and held on to it for dear life. As we sped around one corner, I slid across the seat and squashed Teresa against her door. She scolded me for not wearing a seat belt (I usually do). We passed the turn for the Temple of Hatshepsut, kicking up a cloud of dust on the way. Just short of the Ramesseum, our driver took a sharp turn, and the minibus lurched to a dead stop in a small, paved parking lot. I exhaled and thanked Amen the ride was over.

“We’re here,” Mohamed yelled to us. He pointed toward the windshield. “Up here is the Valley of the Nobles. There are four cemeteries: Khokha, Dra Abu el-Naga, Assassif, and Sheikh Abd el-Qurna. To me, these are more interesting than the tombs of the kings and queens. Here, the engravings and paintings describe daily life in ancient Egypt. We are now going to Sheikh Abd el-Qurna, which is the most popular cemetery, but for good reason.”

Mohamed led us up a gravel driveway, into the non-descript hills of grey and brown rock. The cemeteries, he said, are less popular than the Valleys of Kings and Temple of Hatshepsut. There is no visitors’ center or tuf-tuf here. There were also no other visitors, which was fine with us. The only other figure on the hill that morning was a tall, thin Qurna fellow. Open pits and caverns pockmarked the hillside. They were carved by hand, over centuries, in the search for treasure and shelter. We passed the crumbling remains of a mud-brick building.

“Old houses,” Mohamed said. “Some of the houses date back to the early twentieth century when the local men helped search for tombs. Some are newer storehouses. The Qurna still live here, but they are not welcome.”

As we climbed the hill, I looked back. Many of the old structures were collapsing, the roofs were caved in or missing. Higher up, mud-brick foundations, retaining walls, and ramps lined the hillside. There were hundreds of tombs around us, and some of the structures dated back to the New Kingdom, others were the remains of ancient monasteries.

Mohamed stopped and turned around. He pointed down the hill, and across the road.

“Over there is the mortuary temple of Ramses II. It was a great temple, but most of it was destroyed by floods and theft, and it’s not very interesting to see. If you like, tomorrow I can take you there.” Mohamed relied on repeat business and the occasional upsell to get by. He waited a moment to see whether we would take his bait (we didn’t) before he continued. “The temple is made famous for a poem, by an Englishman.” (Mohamed was referring to Ozymandias by Percy Bysshe Shelley.) From our perch on the hill, we saw a series of columns and architraves surrounded by shattered foundation walls in a sea of green. Anywhere else, it would be interesting, but here, across from Luxor and Karnak, it was an average ruin. I wondered whether Mohamed thought the sidebar was important, or whether he just wanted a break from the slow hike up the hill.

We passed a sign that pointed to our destination: Sennefer. Here, Mohamed was allowed to join us inside the tomb, but once again, he stopped outside and told us what to expect.

“Sennefer was the mayor of Thebes under Amenhotep II, in the Eighteenth Dynasty. He was also in charge of the granaries, livestock, and gardens around Thebes, a big job in those days. He was loved by the pharaoh, who rewarded him with great riches and many wives. His tomb is not luxurious, but it is decorated and preserved. There is an upper chamber but it is closed to visitors. No matter. The burial chamber is down below. Watch your head.”

In the ground ahead of us, there was a steep set of stairs carved down into the limestone surface. High walls of rough, unfinished stone rose above the stairs on either side. A guard checked our tickets and led us down the stairs where a locked, metal gate blocked our entry.

“Beyond here,” Mohamed said, “no photos allowed, but if you want to tip the guard he will turn away.”

The guard produced a small key and opened the padlock. The gate swung open with an eerie c-r-e-e-e-k like the cellar door of a haunted house. The guard led us through the narrow gate and down a long flight of uneven stone steps. We each braced ourselves with one hand on the wall as we slowly descended, step-by-step, into the cavern. Halogen lights, strung on the walls, illuminated the staircase. The walls and ceiling were unfinished; the only decoration, if you will, were the thousands of pockmarks left behind when the masons carved the tunnel in the limestone. The ceiling drooped, unexpectedly, in several places, and, despite Mohamed’s warning, I cracked the top of my head twice (once going down, once going up). Near the bottom, the stairs turned to the right and the ceiling dropped precipitously; I contorted my body to fit through the narrow doorway that led to the antechamber.

The antechamber seemed incomplete. The sides were left uneven, and the corners were rounded, rather than smooth. The ceiling was a bit less than six feet high and I had to kneel while Mohamed described the room to us. The air was stale, and sweat dripped off the tip of my nose. Mohamed searched his pockets; he had left his mirror in the minibus. Teresa offered her pocket flashlight.

“The tomb of Sennefer is called ‘The Tomb of Vines’ and now you see why. He was deeply admired for the gardens around Thebes, and he wanted to be remembered for the vineyards especially. Wine was very important in ancient Egypt. It was used for drinking by everyone even babies and sometimes animals. It was also very important to ceremonies. If you look around you see the walls are covered in frescoes. The masons carved the stone and left it uneven to show depth and space. The ceiling, too.” We all looked up as Mohamed pointed the flashlight toward the low ceiling. “The ceiling rises and falls, and the vines full of grapes look real, like they would in a vineyard. It gives a natural sense to the antechamber, like we are outside. The masons carved the walls and ceiling, but left them with a rolling surface.” To demonstrate the undulating surfaces, Mohamed gently waved his free hand up and down; he looked like he was petting a cat. “They covered the bare, stone walls in plaster then painted everything light-blue to look like we are outside. Then they paint scenes over the blue. You see the dark-skinned priests bringing trays of jewels and cloths? Here also is Sennefer, ready to accept them. And the ceiling too was plastered and painted light blue. The vines are red and brown with thick, heavy bunches of ripe grapes waiting to be picked.” He reached up and pretended to pluck a grape from the vines, and then he dropped it in his mouth. (There is no prohibition against pretending to eat during Ramadan.)

We hunched over and stumbled through a short hallway, its ceiling was hardly more than four feet high. Suddenly we stood in the main burial chamber, a large room about twenty feet square, with an undulating ceiling a little more than six feet high. In addition to the incredible frescoes on the walls and ceilings, the most remarkable features of the chamber may be the four square pillars that “support” the ceiling. The pillars, about two feet across on each side, were carved in situ. The design reveals an impressive master plan by the architects. Here, too, thick sheets of Plexiglas protect the walls and ceilings. Raised planks cover the floor, to protect the smooth, rocky surface from hordes of visitors. Dim lights set into the floor gently illuminate the chamber. They allow visitors to enjoy the craftsmanship without damaging the ancient works. The modern security measures interfere with the mise-en-scène, but without them, the frescoes would suffer.

“Here, the grapevine motif continues along the outer edges of the ceiling. But look here, and here.” Mohamed shined the flashlight at the center row in the ceiling. “These geometric patterns represent carpets that Egyptians would have hung from posts to provide shade in the vineyards. The stone pillars represent the wooden beams or tree trunks that would have supported a roof of woven carpets, like a tent. And the carpets would flutter in the breeze.” Again, he gestured with his hand to show the carpets flapping overhead in an imaginary breeze. This time he looked like he was petting a very tall cat.

Mohamed spent the next several minutes translating the panels that cover every wall from the floor to the ceiling. He described religious ceremonies, offerings, gods, and the afterlife. As he spoke, I felt light-headed and dizzy. I knelt on the ground and pretended to listen, but in reality, I was having another asthma attack. The deeper tombs, like Sennefer’s, have very little fresh air. Archaeologists have discussed adding air purifiers and fans (to regulate the air and protect the tombs, not the visitors), but it was an expensive proposition beyond reality. As Mohamed spoke, I tried to focus on his words, but my mind drifted to the ceiling, and those incredible undulating waves. The grape vines looked incredibly realistic, and I wished very much that I were outside, under a tent, surrounded by a real vineyard in a strong breeze.

Mohamed asked if we had any questions (we didn’t) and led us through the low passageway, through the antechamber, and slowly back up the steps. I hunched over and climbed the stairs like a ladder, pulling myself up one step at a time. As we passed through the steel gate, I stood upright and inhaled deeply. The warm air, thick with dust and sand, burned in my throat.

Halfway down the hill, Mohamed stopped and picked up a small rock from the side of the driveway. We knew from our tour of Karnak, a few days earlier, that he was very interested in pigments, and we assumed he had found a new color to demonstrate.

“Here, look. This is a fossilized shell, from about forty million years ago. Then, northern Africa was under the sea. The limestone hills around us were once on the ocean floor. They are filled with fossils like these. You should take it home.”

Teresa and I inspected the small stone for a minute. It was round, and the surface was lined with concentric circles, just like a shell. It was interesting, but we declined the gift nonetheless.

Mohamed excused himself while Teresa and I poked at the cliffs and stared across the river valley toward Luxor. We could see the temple complex at Karnak. I imagined the causeway that once led from the Temple of Hatshepsut, down the hill and to the riverbank. During the New Kingdom, priests carried ceremonial barques down the causeway, across a pontoon bridge, and through the First Pylon into the courts of Karnak. I imagined the colorful banners whipping in the breeze and the columns of palm trees soaring majestically over the processional way. What a sight it must have been.

A few minutes later, Mohamed returned with a small pocket calculator. He stood next to me and carefully entered the various entrance fees, tuf-tuf rides, taxi ride, boat fare, tips, and then he added his fee on top of that. It came to exactly seven hundred thirty pounds, just as he promised. I added a healthy tip, for which Mohamed was very grateful. He offered to show us the best souvenir shops on the left bank; ones that sold local crafts and textiles (as opposed to the cheap plastic junk we saw on most street corners). Our bags were already too heavy, and we decided to buy souvenirs later in the trip. A few minutes later, the taxi driver dropped us at the ferry slip, where our private boat waited. On the slow ride back to the hotel, Mohamed explained a bit more about the Nile, and then offered his services for other tours around Luxor, Edfu, and Esna. We were bound for Aswan, we explained, and had to decline. Instead, we shook hands and wished each other a happy Ramadan. Mohamed disappeared through a side door while Teresa and I climbed the stairs to the fifth floor. The electricity had failed again, sometime while we were out, and the elevators were out of order.





The Southern Frontier





Aswan sits on the right bank of the Nile, a hundred thirty miles upriver from Luxor, and five hundred miles from Cairo. It is, and always has been, a frontier city, the end of civilization, the last stop in Egypt before Nubia. Archaeological sites line the river and dot the islands and the hills up and down the valley. We wanted to visit Aswan, on our way to Abu Simbel, but we had to get there first. Our first choice was the train. We asked the concierge at our hotel in Luxor for help, but he insisted it would be quite impossible. “No trains for foreigners, no security, not yet,” he said. We asked the ticket agent at the Luxor Railway Station, but he grimaced and shook his head slowly. He looked sheepish, almost sad, as Teresa pleaded our case. We next asked for help in the information office at the train station. Four men filled the small room: two sat on black swivel chairs behind the counter, and two sat on metal folding chairs by the door. They chatted and laughed like kids at recess. We squeezed into the room and tried our luck. We asked about tickets to Aswan, and explained that the ticket vending machines didn’t work, and that the ticket agent wouldn’t sell tickets to us. We were frustrated, we said, because in Cairo, we weren’t allowed to ride the trains, and here it seemed no better.

A heavyset fellow with broad shoulders and matching smile stood up. “No, they cannot sell tickets to you,” he said. “Long distance trains are not safe for you, but short trips are OK. We cannot guarantee your safety. To Aswan, buy tickets on the train. There is a surcharge, six pounds, and with the surcharge, the first-class fare is forty-seven pounds, cash only. The trains leave every morning at eight, nine, and ten o’clock, from Track 2. Any other confessions?”

Teresa and I laughed, but, despite the malapropism, the gentleman had answered all of our questions. He was certainly more helpful, and friendlier, than were the men at the information office in Cairo. Just in case, I asked him to write down the schedules and times in Arabic and English, and he happily obliged (although he kept my pen afterward). He told us to arrive fifteen minutes before the scheduled departure time, but emphatically reminded us that, in Egypt, “Schedules are recommendations, not promises.” We laughed again.

The next morning, we dragged our backpacks to the lobby to check out. The clerk asked about our stay. She wanted to know if we were comfortable, and she wondered whether we enjoyed the temples. “Yes, and yes we did,” I said. She hoped we would come back soon, and we promised that we would.

We stepped outside and waited on the curb for a taxi, but there were none. After a long while, we surrendered to the vagaries of life in Egypt and walked the long mile to the Luxor Railway Station, by way of the Corniche. It was a bit after eight o’clock and the temperature already neared 100 degrees. Sweat poured down my cheeks; the salty residue burned my lips. My hands and arms were brown with a severe case of farmer’s tan. A few days earlier, I had compared my chestnut hue to Mohamed’s arms. “We’re brothers,” he said with a laugh. Teresa was covered head to toe, and her face glistened through layers of sunscreen. “It makes me sweat,” she complained.

Luxor’s train station is a two-story, rectangular building, adorned in limestone and soaring, ornamental pillars. Two massive, fluted columns decorate the façade, one on either side of the portico. Above the portico, a raised relief features a blue-green vulture with a wingspan of at least twenty-five feet. It keeps a wary eye on the road below. That morning, a wall of taxis blocked the road in front of the station. Tax! Tax! Tax! Where you go next? Markets? Karnak? Next, the hotel touts took a turn. You have reservation? Hotel Luxor for you, my friend! We pushed through the crowd and climbed the short ramp into the station.

We waited in the information office where we expected, at least hoped, to find the helpful fellow from the day before. Instead, we found an elderly fellow with wispy white hair; he was petite and frail, and reminded me of my father. I wondered what this man’s life was like. He was probably born during the British occupation, under King Farouk. He likely witnessed the Second World War, the 1952 Revolution, the Suez War, the Six-Day War, the October War, the Camp David Accords, and the 25 January Revolution just a few years earlier. He lived through decades of controversial rule by Nasser, Sadat, and Mubarek, and I wondered what stories he could tell. The man spoke very little English, and he appeared quite distressed to see us in his office that morning. “Please. Wait. New man comes,” he said.

We sat on the folding chairs by the door and waited several minutes. The room, which, the day before, was filled with laughter and hearty shouts, was oddly silent. I stared at the walls and shifted on my seat. Our bags were too heavy and damp with sweat from that morning’s hike across town. Teresa was nervous. She thought we might miss the train. In fact, she was nervous about taking the train at all. Nor did Teresa like the idea of boarding a train without tickets. There might be no seats, or the conductor might put us off at the next stop, she worried.

In Little Britain, a few days earlier, we met a woman who had traveled to Aswan many times and Abu Simbel once or twice, but the trains were problematic, she explained with carefully selected phrasing. The year before, her friend traveled from Luxor to Cairo by train. Somewhere near Asyut, the train got stuck on the tracks after someone dropped a large boulder in its path. The passengers were stuck on the train for nearly three days, but luckily, the townspeople came by and sold food and drinks through the open windows. It may have been a train robbery gone wrong, she suggested, or it may have been a set-up to extort the passengers. “You never know,” she said.

Our train was due at nine o’clock, and Teresa was still nervous. I showed my handy notes to the fellow behind the desk. “Please look,” I said, “these are the directions to our train. Will you please show us the way to our track, so there would be no chance of missing our train.”

The man never spoke. Instead, he led us to the hall and motioned with his hand: go down the stairs, take a right, follow the hall, and come up the far side. His directions were clear and accurate. A moment later, we stood on Track 2, next to a large sign that read, in English: Aswan. It could hardly have been any more obvious.

The platform was busy with families on their way south, and I paced along the platform to inspect our fellow passengers. On the far end of the platform, most of the men wore djellabas, and many women wore dark-colored abayas. Nearer to us, a family sat on a bench. The father, olive-skinned and pudgy, wore dark-grey slacks and a striped polo shirt. The mother wore black slacks and a loose blouse; her hair was in a bun, bare of any hijab. Their children, two boys and a teenage girl, wore jeans and T-shirts. After a few minutes, I realized the platform was segregated by passenger class. The men and women dressed in traditional garb would be in second class; they waited at the far end of the platform. The first-class cars would be directly behind the engine, at the front of the train, where we waited, along with a few other passengers. By their dress, I presumed they were Coptic. I wondered whether it was a firm class division, but I decided not to ask the question; it seemed to beg for trouble.

Trains once ran all over Egypt. They ran along the Mediterranean, from Masra Matrah in the west to the Suez Canal in the east. They ran along the Nile from Alexandria to Aswan. And they ran from the Nile to Safaga on the Red Sea, and west to Kharga and Baris Oases. Over the last few years, the infrastructure crumbled and service was cut. Scrappers have stolen hundreds of miles of rails along some stretches of the old tracks. Today, there is regular passenger service along the Nile, but most of the other schedules are fading memories.

About ten minutes after nine o’clock, a train whistled in the distance. Soon, a lumbering diesel engine rounded the corner. It spit black smoke in the air, and its brakes burned hot asbestos as it rolled to a stop. We grabbed our bags and ran for the nearest door, but really, there was no hurry. A crush of tired, smelly, and angry passengers stormed off the train from every door. Some passed their luggage through the open windows to family and friends on the platform. The touts were right behind. You have hotel? Where you go next? We ignored their sales pitches and waited for a clearing among the crowds. A young man, about twenty years old, asked if we were headed to Aswan. “Yes,” I said. He told me to follow him and he led us to the first car, which by then was nearly empty. He politely held open the door for Teresa, and told me to find a seat, the conductor would be along soon to take our tickets, he explained. Teresa frowned at that, but I realized the fellow was speaking in polite generality. I reached in my pocket and found a crumpled note. I couldn’t read the number, but by its size and condition, I guessed it were a fiver. I slipped it to the young man, and he gratefully accepted. Teresa asked me why I tipped him at all, what had he done for us, she wondered. “It’s Ramadan,” I said. (I had read that Sadaqah – voluntary charity – during Ramadan is rewarded ten-fold on Judgment Day. I’ll let you know.) We wandered into the car and looked for a clean seat.

“Yes, welcome, please come in, sit anywhere!” The helpful stranger was half-asleep. Between yawns, he spoke with a heavy Arabic accent. “The car is empty. Please, sit wherever you like. I am Mr. Hussan.” Our new friend, Mr. Hussan, was a middle-aged fellow, perhaps fifty years old, dressed in baggy, blue jeans, and bright white sneakers. His pink polo shirt was wrinkled and disheveled; one more victim to a long night slept on the train.

We sat in the pair of seats behind Mr. Hussan. The car was set up like a small plane, with a column of single airline-style seats on the left, and a column of twin seats on the right. Everything about the car was tired: the seats were lumpy and threadbare; the floor was grimy and stained with nefarious sticky fluids; the windows were streaked with grey. The air-conditioning worked when the train was in motion, but, in the station, weak batteries powered the cars, so only the lights worked. There was room for about forty-five passengers in the car, but as we boarded I counted a dozen heads or so, including Mr. Hussan. The train, a long-distance local from Cairo, had traveled overnight, and it stopped in every town and village en route. Whoever occupied our seats before us left their trash between the cushions, on the floor, and in the seatback pockets ahead of us. Except for the seat configuration, it was exactly like an Amtrak train.

As the train pulled out of the station, Teresa relaxed; we were headed south, and that was good enough for her. A few minutes later, a cool breeze wafted above our heads. The air-conditioning was weak, but it worked. We took turns staring out the window, looking for traces of the Nile. Teresa studied our guidebook while I snapped a long series of blurry pictures through the dirty window. Our train was an express schedule so we passed through several small towns. I tried to read the signs on the platforms, but we moved too quickly, and, oh, I can’t read Arabic. (Outside of the major towns and cities, few signs are printed in English.)

About thirty minutes into our three-hour ride, the conductor came through to check tickets. When he reached our row, I handed over a hundred-pound note and said, “Aswan.” The conductor pulled out two tickets, scribbled on them for a minute, and handed them to me. I stared at them for a long while trying to decipher the markings, but nowhere did it say Aswan. Meanwhile, the conductor checked all of his pockets for change, but found none. Mr. Hussan interrupted the conductor, and they chatted for a few minutes, about what we had no idea. Eventually he handed a five-pound note to the conductor, who then handed the five-pound note to me.

“I wanted to make sure you got your change, and that he charged you the right price.” Mr. Hussan knelt on his seat and turned around to face us. “Foreigners pay a different price, much more than we pay.” He turned around and sat back down. He kept to himself for a few minutes, but his curiosity got the best of him. “Excuse me, what are your names, please?”

Teresa introduced herself first, but the poor fellow’s English skills were no match for her Irish accent. She and Mr. Hussan went back and forth a few times to no avail. Flustered, Mr. Hussan looked at me for help.

“Te-re-sa,” I said slowly and clearly. Then I remembered the zipper pull on Teresa’s bag. The trinket was just a cheap souvenir from a prior trip, but it had her name on it. “Look here,” I said, “it says Teresa.” Then I introduced myself. “My name is Paul,” I said. Mr. Hussan slowly mouthed the monosyllabic word back to me. “Bowel?” For some reason, non-native English speakers often split the vowels in my name, as though they are expecting a new syllable that never comes. I wrote our names on a sheet of paper and handed it to Mr. Hussan. He tried his luck again. “Powell?” “Pool?” “Pall?” That was close enough.

“And Teresa, what do you do for a profession?”

“I’m a microbiologist.”

Mr. Hussan’s face contorted around the word. He quickly realized that his grasp of the English language was less strong than he ever had imagined. “Please, no, sorry. Repeat?”

I wrote down our occupations on a piece of paper, and Mr. Hussan studied the words with great caution. Then it was my turn. “Mr. Hussan, how do you spell your name?”

“However you like, it’s fine.”

Transliteration between Arabic and English is a game with no winners. Sure, some have tried to standardize spellings and pronunciations, but the result is mixed, at best. In that moment, I recalled a news program I saw years earlier. The American news anchor opened his salvo by asking his guest, a sheikh from Qatar, how to pronounce his country’s name.

“However you like,” he answered.

“Well, sir, some people say ‘Kuh-tar,’ while others say “Cutter.’ What’s the correct pronunciation?”

“However you like, it’s all fine.”

The anchor dropped his question, and so did I.

Our conversation with Mr. Hussan continued on-and-off for much of the ride. He was a schoolteacher, he told us, in a settlement several hours east of Aswan. During the school year, he and a few colleagues car-pool from Aswan, three hours each way through the desert, to a small school that the government recently built. The younger teachers can’t afford the daily journey, so they live in the dusty village from September to May each year, he added. The school was only a few rooms, and they had to buy their own propane to run the generators, he told us, but even then, it was only for an hour a day, during lunch. Mr. Hussan was, of course, an English teacher, and he was very excited to meet us on the train.

Our conversation drifted through the typical topics: weather, geography, which sites had we seen, which sites did Mr. Hussan recommend. We enjoyed our conversation, but Mr. Hussan was very clear: “We must not discuss politics. We can speak of anything else, and we’ll have no trouble.” But, perhaps unsurprisingly, Mr. Hussan quickly violated his own prohibition. He mentioned Mubarek and Morsi. “People are sick of politics. It’s so much talk and no end.” He was quiet for a moment, but continued. “There is so much war. People in Egypt used to dream of the United States. Everyone wanted to go there. But no more. Now, Iraq, Afghanistan, there is no love for America anymore.” Mr. Hussan returned to his seat and sat quietly for awhile.

The train rolled through the valley at about fifty miles per hour. The steel wheels struggled against the hot rails: click thunk click thunk click. Between years of limited maintenance and the extreme heat, the tracks were poorly aligned, and the car rocked back and forth like a skiff caught in the wake of a passing barge. To the left, the scenery never changed. Rolling hills of brown rock and mounds of scree piled high against the horizon. To the right, we passed miles of verdant fields, a narrow stretch of green that ran between the river and the desert. Every few minutes, we passed by a small village of single-story brick houses painted in green or blue or beige. Some of the buildings had collapsed, or their roofs had fallen in. In one village, I watched two young boys roll truck tires down the dirt road; the boys looked quite happy. Every once in awhile, we passed small, single-story structures that I couldn’t identify. The buildings were square with flat roofs and round domes. The domes were dotted with tiny, open-air windows. I asked Mr. Hussan what they were.

“Nubian architecture,” he said, “it gets more common in the south. They use it for mausoleums and churches and houses. Especially in houses. The hot air rises to the curved ceiling and is forced out of the small holes, like an oven. Cheap air condition. Some are what you call… I think for the bees?”

“You mean honeycomb?”

“No, like where bees live?”

“Oh, oh, beehive?”

“Yes, of course, thank you. The beehive is popular, too.”

A few minutes passed without conversation while we all busied ourselves with various chores. Mr. Hussan cleared the garbage from his seat. Teresa wrote in her diary, and I deleted dozens of blurry images from our digital camera. Mr. Hussan kneeled on his seat, once again, and turned to chat with us.

“I applied for a translation job in the US, once,” he said, “but the Egyptian woman on the hiring committee did not like me, because I am from the south. She was from the north. There is a big difference you know. So one day I received a call to tell me I was no longer an applicant. But no one would tell me why. But I know why.”

Mr. Hussan looked sad so Teresa changed the subject. She asked if it were safe to travel in Egypt, and Mr. Hussan insisted it was. “These problems are new,” he said, “we never used to have this violence. What is the word I read on your newspapers? For explosions?”

I knew exactly what word Mr. Hussan wanted to say, but I hesitated to tell him. He ran through a glossary of contemporary terms, till eventually I relented.

“I think you mean IED?”

“Yes, this word, what does it mean?”

“It’s a military phrase: improvised explosive device,” I whispered. He asked me to write it down, and handed back to me the same sheet of paper on which I had earlier written our names and occupations. I imagined that sheet of paper – with our names and improvised explosive device – introduced as evidence in some future trial. I balked for a moment, then Teresa offered a new sheet of paper, and I wrote the acronym and its meaning there.

“These problems, with IED, these are new here. Ever since the kewp.”

“Kewp? You mean the coup?” I asked. He had read the word in an English-language newspaper, but had never heard it spoken.

“Yes, sorry, I am sleepy. What is this word: koo? Will you write it down for me, please?”

“It’s a French word, I think. It means to hit, but now it means a surprise attack or victory, like a revolution.”

We went back and forth for a few minutes and I tried to steer the conversation away from war and politics, but Mr. Hussan couldn’t help himself. I asked if he enjoyed American literature, and I named several titles. But he only knew British works. Teresa asked whether Mr. Hussan knew of any good restaurants in Aswan.

“Yes, of course, but everything is closed, for Ramadan. Maybe they will be open later tonight, at ten o’clock?”

Somewhere around Al Madiq – or was it Dabud? – the train stopped for what must have been an unscheduled break. After a few minutes at the station, several passengers (all men) stepped off and lit their cigarettes. The smoke wafted through the open doors and filled our car. With no air-conditioning, the air grew warm, and the sour cigarette smoke soiled my tongue. I wanted to spit. Instead, I stared out the window at the station and the tracks beyond. This was, by far, the largest town between Luxor and Aswan, and from my lumpy seat on the smoke-filled train car, the city looked completely unattractive; not uninteresting, just unattractive. Along the tracks, between the station and a low wall, there was a small shantytown. Tarps, carpets, and sheets formed a makeshift roof over walls of scrap cardboard and plaster. The ground around the shantytown was littered with plastic jugs, paper, bricks, and metal. Further down the track, I noticed several open-sided freight cars filled, several feet deep, with garbage, and more garbage littered the ground. They don’t publish those images in guidebooks.

The train lurched to a start, and the men on the platform slipped back on the train. A few minutes later, Mr. Hussan described the upcoming shift in scenery.

“Soon,” he said, “the Nile will appear on the right, and that’s when we know we’re near Aswan. The water will be bright blue, and the desert will meet the river. There are no fields there,” he said, “just city and sand. But in the hills on the left bank there are tombs and mosques and quarries that you should visit.” Then Mr. Hussan scribbled his phone number on a piece of paper and handed it to us. “I hope you will call me while you are in Aswan, but I know you won’t,” he said. (Unfortunately, he was right.)

The train slowed to a crawl and passengers leapt to the tracks before the train even stopped. Men and boys of all ages swarmed the doors. The boys wanted to carry our bags; the men offered hotel rooms and taxi rides. One particularly aggressive taxi driver followed us the length of the platform. Mr. Hussan politely explained to the taxi driver that we wanted to walk to our hotel, but the driver ignored him. The driver followed us down the stairs, through the tunnel, and back upstairs; he only turned away when he noticed two police officers in the terminal.

The three of us stopped in front of the station to say our good-byes. Mr. Hussan asked us, once again, to call him before we left Aswan, and he shook our hands. We told him that we were staying at the Philae, a hotel on the Corniche, about a mile south of the train station. “Walk straight,” he said, “and take a left at the river. There you will find your hotel.” Mr. Hussan waved and disappeared into the crowd. We never saw him again.

We followed Mr. Hussan’s directions and soon reached the Corniche. The east side of the road was lined with office and apartment buildings, but the west side was open to the river, save for the occasional restaurant or snack stand. The buildings along the Corniche seemed newer and taller than much of what we had seen in Luxor and Cairo. The shops were a mix of high-end retailers selling women’s and men’s fashions and electronics and furniture. There were several banks, including international chains that we recognized from Europe. Everything was closed for Ramadan; their posted hours promised they would open in the evening. The sidewalk, though shaded by the porticos, was cracked and caked in sand and dirt. A dozen women set out blankets and cloths across the sidewalk and displayed their wares in a makeshift market. Their goods included mounds of nuts and herbs and fruits and vegetables. Meanwhile, dozens of taxi drivers slowed and honked. Tax! Tax!

The Philae Hotel fills the upper floors of a five-story block along the Corniche. The building probably dates to the 1960s, when the thousands of construction workers from the nearby Aswan High Dam project lived in town. From the front, the sun-drenched building looks like it belongs in Old Hollywood. It’s not quite mid-century modern, but it’s not far off, either. The hotel shares the ground floor with various offices and retail spaces. Every room above the ground floor has a balcony with sliding glass doors. Large, block letters spell out its name across the balcony railings: PHILAE HOTEL. It was an interesting façade, if not particularly attractive.

Teresa rang the buzzer for access to the lobby (the farther we traveled from Cairo, the less security each hotel had), and we waited. The desk clerk, a young woman, about twenty-five years old, dressed in tights jeans, loose blouse, and a simple scarf, greeted us in fluent English. We asked to see a room and she obliged. The city view room looked over a dank, trash-strewn alley; it cost fifty dollars per night, which, given the ambience, was about fifty dollars a night too much. The river view room, which looked over the Corniche and across the Nile, cost ten dollars more, but it was larger and brighter than its counterpart across the hall. We picked the latter.

Teresa stayed upstairs to unpack and shower while I followed the desk clerk back to the lobby to register with the hotel. She was very talkative, and she may well have been the nicest (and prettiest) woman we met in Egypt. I wondered where she learned English, but she talked so much I never got the chance to ask. If I met her on the streets of America, though, I would have assumed she were born and raised there, her English was that strong. I handed over our passports and waited while she filled in a dozen forms. A minute later, she laughed out loud.

“She’s not your daughter? She’s so pretty, and she looks so young!”

I thanked the woman, on Teresa’s behalf, for the compliment, before I realized its implication about me. For some reason, I paid in cash. I counted out a thick wad of Egyptian pound notes. When the clerk returned my change, she took her time and counted the bills back to me, one at a time.

“You have to be careful,” she said. “Don’t just look at the numbers, read the words. One side is Arabic (she flipped the note over), the other is in English.”

I climbed back upstairs and found Teresa on the bed. She had already checked the room for running water, leftover trash, and bedbugs (something we do in every hotel), and declared the hotel satisfactory on all counts. While Teresa rested, I toured the room. The floors were white tile, and though most of the walls were painted a bright white, the wall behind the twin beds was painted dark blue. The furniture was modern: dark woods with a desk, mirror, two small chairs, and a flat-screen television. The sliding glass doors by the balcony were glazed with a reflective tint. They reflected a bit of traffic noise and sunlight, but they were hot to the touch. The bathroom was a fair size, and clean, but it had an odd feature. The wall between the bathroom and sleeping quarters had a large, plate-glass window in it, directly over the tub. There was a set of curtains over the window for privacy, but it still seemed like the strangest place to put a window.

Just as I finished my tour of the room, there was a knock at the door. A porter stood at the door with a tray of fresh fruit and karkadé. He asked us where we were from (“Ireland,” I said), and suggested a few sights around town. As we chatted, the power failed, and the air conditioner whined and sputtered its last breath. Our room, which, as a selling point, overlooked the Corniche and the Nile, also faced due west, and the sun bore down with all its might. The forecast that day called for temperatures above 115 degrees, the hottest weather yet on our trip. The young man apologized for the loss of electricity and bid us farewell. A bead of sweat trickled from my forehead, down my nose, and splashed on the tile floor between my feet. As in Luxor, if we were to die of heat exhaustion we decided it would be outside, on the streets, rather than in a stuffy hotel room.

The desk clerk was surprised to see us so soon. “I’m sorry about the electricity,” she said. “Everyday the government cuts the power for an hour or so. There’s nothing we can do.”

We smiled and said it was the same in Luxor, so we were used to it. We asked whether there were any cafes to sit for awhile, perhaps one with a working air conditioner.

“No, everything is closed for the day. It is Ramadan; everything will be open tonight, when it gets dark.” She was still concerned to see us step outside. “Please, it’s too hot to go outside. You should wait. Besides, everything is closed!”

Mr. Hussan had recommended a shawarma restaurant on the road behind the Philae. Though we knew very well it would be closed we used it as an excuse to explore the town. We circled the block and found the narrow road behind the hotel: a crowded lane of asphalt between towering concrete buildings. There were no sidewalks or curbs, just a wall of cars on each side parked directly against the buildings, and wherever there were no cars, there were mounds of garbage. The narrow strip between the parked cars and mounds of garbage was a busy thoroughfare for pedestrians, scooters, and a few cats. Of all the storefronts we passed, most were closed, shuttered behind rolling steel gates. The only shop open for business was a small bakery, its counters piled high with hundreds of loaves of aish baladi, a round flatbread commonly consumed for the daily iftar. The bakery was quiet then, but, in a few hours, a line would form down the street as hordes of women (and a few men) stopped by for bags of hot bread.

We couldn’t remember the name of the shawarma restaurant Mr. Hussan had recommended. He called it by its Arabic name, which we couldn’t pronounce and for which there was no particular translation, so we asked him to write it down for us. He obliged, and wrote the name in Arabic, which, to us, looked like a long series of curved lines decorated with dots and accent marks. As we marched from one end of the road to the other, we compared Mr. Hussan’s markings with the signs hanging above the doors along the way. We found one likely candidate, but, like everything else, it was closed and locked tight behind a rolling steel gate.

“Are you lost?” The stranger, a tall and slender Egyptian fellow dressed in business casual attire, looked concerned.

“Oh, no, thank you. We were looking for a restaurant,” I answered. He asked for the name of the restaurant so I showed him the scrap of paper with Mr. Hussan’s inscription.

“Where did you get this?” He was increasingly concerned, as though the note were more sinister than the name of a restaurant. Perhaps he thought it were a bomb threat or sketches of a naked woman.

“We met a fellow on the train, and we asked for the name of a good restaurant.”

His eyes opened wide, and for a moment, he was speechless. He wanted to scold us for trusting a stranger on the train, but he composed himself. “This restaurant is closed, for Ramadan. It’s fine, but not for you. Try McDonalds or Kentucky Fry Chicken, by the river. Encourage the American companies, maybe more will come.” It was, perhaps, the strangest advice I ever heard, but the helpful stranger seemed sincere.

We walked several more blocks along that back road, parallel to the Corniche. The mounds of garbage grew taller and traffic grew heavier. Every time a car, truck, or donkey trailer passed, we had to step out of the way, usually between parked cars, or on top of the garbage. Our walk was exactly as unpleasant as it sounds. We eventually turned back to the hotel, but, that time, we crossed the Corniche, and hugged the river. By then, the road was quiet so we walked along, past the hotel. The road curved away from the river, up a hill, and past a large garden.

At the top of the hill, we found a magnificent church: The Archangel Michael Coptic Orthodox Cathedral. We had noticed its twin towers, capped with shining crosses, from the street below. The cathedral, consecrated in 2006, may well have been the largest and most beautiful church in Egypt. It was certainly the most secure church we visited on that trip. A high, stone wall surrounds the building. Visitors enter through a rounded stone arch protected by a heavy, wrought iron gate. The gate was open so we wandered inside, but in the courtyard we found a desert-yellow tank topped with a high-caliber machine gun. We didn’t mind the tank, but its gunner very much minded us. The soldier kept his hands on the trigger and pointed the weapon at us. I removed my hat and said Hello, but in doing so, I must have offended the gunner. He yelled and cursed and yelled some more. Two men, civilian church employees I presumed, ran around the corner. They looked at us, laughed, and waved us through. The gunner returned to his stance, with his weapon pointed at the open gate.

When it comes to cathedrals, size matters, and Archangel Michael happily obliges with immodest grace. I couldn’t count the pews; there were too many. The marble columns, of which, thanks to modern building materials, there were remarkably few, were dressed with flat-screen televisions and speakers, which would be necessary to see and hear the action way up front, at the altar. And the cathedral rolled on for a hundred feet past the altar, behind the towering iconostasis, to a world of secret ritual known only to ranking church officials and the janitors who clean up after them.

Several elderly women sat around a card table by the door. They chatted away and ignored us. A second batch of women sat in the pews. They chatted away and ignored us. Two children played cops and robbers in the aisles between the pews. A group of men and women stood in the center aisle, up near the altar, but they were so far away I couldn’t tell who they were, or what they were doing. The cathedral felt like a social club, and its guests seemed very happy to be there.

Teresa circumnavigated the aisles and admired the craftsmanship while I stuck my nose at a scale-model of the church. The model, encased in glass and set on a pedestal near the door, had seen better days. It was discolored and one of the towers leaned to the right, but other than that, it was an exact, albeit miniature, replica. The only thing missing was the tank and shaky soldier. Teresa eventually made her way around the room and when she got back to me, she asked for a few coins. She wanted to light a candle; it’s one of the few Catholic customs that she follows. While she lit her candle, I looked around the room one more time. There were at least a dozen donation boxes around the room; each solicited money for a particular cause.

From the cathedral, we followed the road up a steep slope, toward the Nubia Museum, which received a positive mention in our guidebook. The museum entrance is at the top of a twisted driveway so we couldn’t see that it was closed (at two o’clock, for Ramadan) till we reached the top. Alone and unguarded, we enjoyed the view from our perch above the city. We stared over the cathedral, toward Aswan and the Nile. To the east, we saw a large cemetery, and our guidebook promised that over there, somewhere in the distance, lay the great Unfinished Obelisk (which is exactly what the name implies). The museum, with its parapets, turrets, and windowless, stone walls, looks much like a fortress, and just like a fortress, its doors were locked tight. We abandoned our outpost and retreated to town.

There were exactly two restaurants open at that hour, and they were those two fast food places that the helpful gentleman in the alley had suggested to us a couple hours earlier. We settled on Kentucky Fried Chicken, which, like McDonald’s, sits on a ledge over the riverbank. If nothing else, we would have a grand view of the Nile. A shallow ramp led from the Corniche, down the embankment, and toward the restaurant and a small boat dock.

“Yes, they are open! Please come in!” The voice flowed like syrup: thick and heavy. Its owner was a middle-aged Nubian man, his skin black and shiny like worn leather. He stood at least eight inches taller than me, and his djellaba danced around his narrow frame like a flag blowing in the wind. Tom Tom, as he called himself, owned a small tour boat, and, if we liked, he would take us on a tour of the river after our lunch, he told us. Unlike the hantour and taxi drivers of Luxor, Tom Tom’s approach was slow and tender; he handled us with great care. “This is Nubia,” he said, “not Egypt. Life here moves slowly.” Inside the restaurant, we counted three men in the booths against one wall; none of them wore shoes and the soles of their feet looked oddly pink against their dark skin. They were boatmen, like Tom Tom, who sat at the booths much of the day, where they waited for business that rarely comes.

The menu board, posted above the counter, was printed in Arabic and English, but even then, many of the words were unintelligible. Zinger, Twister, and Filler sounded foreign and we relied on the larger-than-life pictures printed on the menu board rather than the words around them. The store manager stood behind the counter for several minutes while Teresa and I stared at the menu and whispered to each other. Do they sell chicken? I don’t know, it says chicken. But what’s a Big Filler Smokey? I don’t know. Should I ask? In the end, we ordered two chicken Zinger sandwiches – one spicy, one normal – with Pepsi and french fries. The manager shouted the order back to the kitchen, but there was no one there to hear him. A few minutes later, he found his solitary chef hiding in the walk-in freezer. (Who would blame him?)

If you’ve ever eaten fast food, then you know what our meal tasted like, which, again, is exactly the point. The flour breading dwarfed the chicken, and the roll, slathered in mayonnaise, dwarfed everything. The french fries were long, thin, and tasted like wet potato doused with salt. Just like our McDonald’s hamburgers in Cairo, there was an aftertaste that neither of us could place. It may have been a local spice or oil; it wasn’t bad, just different, and it lingered long after we finished our food. The Pepsi, delivered in ice-cold cans, was by far the best part of our meal. Within a few minutes, my stomach twisted around the sodium, sugar, oil, and caffeine, and my eyes throbbed from the spike in my blood pressure. Fast food is the secret weapon by which America will conquer the world: by killing everyone who touches it.



⁂



The bellhop left a pleasant surprise for us while we were out – a basket of toiletries by the bathroom sink: toothbrushes, soaps, cotton swabs, and mouthwash. So it was hard to complain about the air conditioner, which growled and shook with great fanfare but little success. Teresa closed the drapes, but it was too late: the room was insufferably warm. We took cold showers, tried to sleep, then tried to read, and tried to watch television. In the end, we gave up and went for another walk, but first we stopped at the front desk. There was a different desk clerk on duty then: a young Nubian man with a loose accent that fell somewhere between British and Indian English. I asked whether he could help us plan a trip to Abu Simbel.

“Of course! It is my pleasure. We do this every day. You will go tonight?”

Abu Simbel is an ancient Egyptian temple complex in the deepest south of Egypt. By all accounts, the road is dangerous: bandits and kidnappings are a constant threat. If they don’t get you, the heat will. For all the danger and warnings there may as well be giants lurking among the sand dunes. The government restricts all travel south of Aswan to armed convoys, of which there are two scheduled each day. Teresa was excited to see the temples, but nervous about the trip itself. She asked a lot of questions, and the desk clerk desperately tried to help. His big book of tours, which he kept on a shelf under the front desk, included a single sheet for Abu Simbel: an itinerary listing the departure times, and a phone number for the tour company (but not its name). He offered to call them while we waited.

“They have a bus that can take you tonight. It is a minibus, with eight seats. Normally the price is eighty pounds per person, but only if the bus is full. Otherwise, you pay for the whole bus. Tonight they have one man who wants to go. A businessman from China. He offered to pay for half the bus, so, if you like, you can pay the other half. That is three hundred twenty pounds.”

“Each? Or total?”

“Total. Because you have to pay for half the bus. But it will just be you and one other man. They can also provide a private car which is six hundred fifty pounds total, but just for you and the drivers.”

“The shared bus will be fine. Thank you. What time do we leave?”

“The bus will leave at three o’clock. Tonight. But you should be here early, just in case,” the clerk said.

We asked the clerk for a wake-up call and set off, again, to explore Aswan.



⁂



As we left the hotel, the sun slipped below the horizon. The fading light twisted the blue sky into streams of pink and yellow, but sunset comes slowly to the desert. The sand reflected the dying embers, and for the next hour, as we walked around town and waited for the city to open, we were bathed in an eerie glow that turned our skin to gold.

We followed the Corniche – on the riverside – back to the train station, and we watched the city come to life on the way. Earlier that day, we had the roads to ourselves, while Aswan slept, but that evening the city stirred to life. First, the hantour drivers noticed us; then the taxi drivers slowed and honked at us; then the felucca pilots shouted up to us from the decks of their sailboats. The restaurants and shops were still closed, but the streets teemed with life. Men and boys, in groups of two or three, ran through the traffic toward the Corniche. Others leaned against the railings looking over the river, while others walked arm and arm down the sidewalk. Some of the boys leered at Teresa; others smiled and waved. Volunteers erected a long row of tables on the road near the train station. Later that evening, great buffets would serve the rich and the poor alike.

We found a snack stand along the Corniche and bought water, but the candy and chips that lined the shelves offered no salvation. We wanted real food, something better than the fast food we had eaten earlier that afternoon. Our guidebook suggested a pizza place near the train station, along with a handful of curbside cafes, and we thought they might be open by then. Still, the sun refused to set, and the restaurateurs refused to open. According to the map in our guidebook, a long avenue, Saad Zaghloul, led from the train station back to the Philae. It looked promising on paper, but in reality, it was an empty four-lane byway, lined with office buildings and apartment blocks. We circled back to the hotel, empty-handed.

Teresa insisted she wasn’t hungry (she was), so I left her in the hotel lobby while I tried, one last time, to find dinner. First, I checked with the desk clerk. He apologized, but the hotel restaurant was closed for the night. “The cook is off. Check along the river,” he said. “Those restaurants cater to tourists, they might be open.” I circled the block around the hotel, but even though the sun had finally set, and families filled the streets, the restaurants were locked tight. So, don’t judge me, but for the second time that day, I went to Kentucky Fried Chicken.

The manager greeted me by the door. “Hello again, my friend. Nice to see you.” I tried to smile, but couldn’t. The restaurant was busy; the boatmen were gone, replaced with families. They gorged on fried chicken, fried potatoes, fried rice, coleslaw, and biscuits – lots of biscuits. Buckets and trays blanketed the tables while a conveyor belt of hands grabbed at food and drinks. The adults, who probably fasted for at least a dozen hours that day, could barely keep up with the children. (Children are not required to fast but often do.) I ordered two chicken sandwiches and sat at a table by the window to wait. By then it was too dark to see outside, and all I saw was my round face in the reflection.

I sat there, for an hour, and watched the scene around me. A family sat at a booth across the aisle. The woman wore an abaya, scarf, and niqab (face veil). Her husband and children chowed on fists full of chicken. They grabbed and tore at the food with both hands, but the woman showed more restraint. She raised her veil with one hand, just enough to reveal her lips, and then she popped a bit of food in her mouth with the other. Between bites, she wiped her hands on a cloth napkin and slurped her drink.

Several generations of another family filled two tables near the door. Grey-haired grandparents, mothers, fathers, brothers, sisters, and seven or eight children crowded around a feast of chicken and potatoes. Some of the children, high on calories, ran circles around the restaurant. When they finished their feast, one of the younger men walked up to the counter and asked for the manager. They chatted for a minute – their voices low and reverential. The manager disappeared around a corner and returned with a rolled sajjada (prayer rug). I’m not sure whether restaurants often carry extra sajjada for emergencies, but I wouldn’t be surprised.

I turned my attention to the kitchen. There I saw half a dozen young men in their fast food uniforms. They told jokes and laughed and wrapped their arms around each other’s shoulders. One fellow opened a two-liter bottle filled with a muddy liquid and passed it around; each of the men chugged from the bottle till it was half gone. They cheered and sent the bottle on another circuit. The manager pulled a second, two-liter bottle from a refrigerator behind the counter. He filled a small paper cup with the foamy, black drink and offered it to me. “Erk sous,” he said. “It’s a traditional Egyptian drink. Would you like to try some?”

I had seen erk sous dealers on street corners around Egypt. They often carry large, metal urns of juice on their back, or on rolling carts, and serve the drink to thirsty pedestrians and drivers. It was probably the same drink that Cola Man offered to me on the bus ride to Luxor. Erk sous is a popular, and supposedly healthy, drink made from the licorice root, but I can’t stand licorice. I was flattered, but had to refuse the moment of solidarity.

“Sorry for the wait, but your dinner time is their breakfast,” the manager said.

“No hurry. I enjoy the air-conditioning.” The sun was long gone and the windows were cool to the touch. I leaned back against the glass and closed my eyes for another long while.

Teresa kept vigil by the window, worried that, after an hour or so, I might never return. When she saw me cross the street with a bag of chicken sandwiches, she probably swore under her breath, but dinner was better than our lunch, she admitted. It was better than nothing, I grumbled.

We showered and went to bed, but I couldn’t sleep. The air conditioner blew intermittent waves of tepid and cool air across my feet, but for all its noise, it never got cold. We napped on and off, but neither of us really slept. By two o’clock, we gave up. After another round of showers, we packed our bags and hid them in the wardrobe. Then we sat in the lobby and waited for our bus to Abu Simbel.





Gobsmacked





“Good news! The bus company found two more passengers for your tour so you get a refund. Here is your change. And here is your breakfast.” The desk clerk slid two small boxes over the counter, and put a small white envelope next to them. Two backpackers – twenty-something American men – had checked into the hotel a few hours after us and joined our tour, the clerk explained. But I didn’t want to share a minibus with two twenty-something American men. I stared at them from across the room while they sat on the couch and buried their faces in their cell phone screens. Like all twenty-something Americans, they checked their e-mail, updated their dating status, and were generally useless. I realized that they were the first Americans we had seen in weeks, and I didn’t like them – at all. I cursed them under my breath while Teresa told me to hush. “They’re just sitting there. Why are you so grumpy all the time?” she said. It would be a long ride.

Our convoy assembled on a dark road at the southern reaches of Aswan. We sat in the back seat, the backpackers took the middle row, and the businessman sat in the front row, just behind the drivers. “Leave the curtains closed,” our driver said, “the police don’t want to show their faces.” Suddenly, our trip felt more like a raid than a pleasure tour. Our drivers – every vehicle had two – jumped out and opened the rear doors, just behind my seat, for inspection. While they stood there, waiting, I cocked my head and spied on the scene behind me. Several police officers gathered on the curb and chatted in hushed tones. Other than that, the street was dark and quiet. Suddenly, several other officers, armed with rifles and dressed with bulletproof vests, swarmed our minibus on all sides. They swept the undercarriage with mirrors and led a bomb-sniffing dog through the interior. A minute later, the rear doors slammed shut, and someone – one of our drivers, I presumed – reached through the window, shut off the ignition, and took the keys. We sat there, parked in the middle of the road, in the stuffy minibus with the curtains drawn, for about thirty minutes. Teresa fell asleep while I peeked through the cracks between the curtains. The businessman turned around in his seat, introduced himself, and asked where everyone was from. The backpackers were half-asleep and gave limp answers, something about America. I half-lied, again, and said that we were from Ireland. The businessman was unsatisfied with our short answers. He wanted to chat, and I was his only target.

“My name is Wei. I’m only here for a few days,” he said. “My first time in Egypt. Is this your first time in Egypt? I got here yesterday, from China. I only sleep one hour in two days!” I envied his enthusiasm and his energy. I had barely slept one hour since leaving Luxor nearly twenty-four hours earlier, and I missed my bed at the Sonesta.

“You should sleep now,” I said, “so you’ll be awake for the temples.”

Wei snorted and sniffed. Then he turned around, pulled out two cell phones, and tapped away at their screens while we sat and waited for the convoy to leave. Teresa and the backpackers were asleep with their heads back and their mouths open.

Through the windshield, I saw one car ahead of us, parked in the middle of the road, with its lights off. Every few minutes, I heard another car or minibus pull into line behind us. From the sounds of slamming doors and occasional shouts, I guessed that the police searched every car and van in the convoy. After a long while, a white minibus raced to the front of the line. On the convoys, the police choose the cars or buses in which they travel, and there is always a lead and a tail. For our convoy, that white minibus would be our lead; two armed officers jumped in it and slammed their doors. A dozen engines roared to life, and the race to Abu Simbel was on.

I had read about the convoys. After a string of kidnappings, murders, and robberies in the southern frontier, the Egyptian government restricted all tourist travel around Egypt. Any tourists traveling away from the Nile Valley required a permit and, often, a police escort. There were two scheduled convoys to Abu Simbel every day, but if there weren’t enough tourists, the convoy could be canceled. (No one could tell me what constitutes enough.) Our convoy was scheduled to depart at four o’clock in the morning, arrive in Abu Simbel before eight, and return to Aswan by one in the afternoon. It was a marathon: one hundred eighty miles, each way, through the open desert, at top speed, no looking back. Our group would have a little more than two hours to tour the temples. Intrepid travelers could spend a night or two in the village of Abu Simbel, a few miles away, but there’s little to see or do in town, especially during the summer, and especially during Ramadan. (We now regret not taking the chance.)

From our assembly point, we raced through the streets of Aswan, south, up and down winding roads through residential neighborhoods. The minibus shook violently over the bumpy roads. I pushed one hand against the ceiling to steady myself while I peeked through the windshield and through the cracks between the curtains. It was four o’clock in the morning, but the city was wide-awake. Traffic was light, but men and women roamed the streets. They gathered food and drink for the day’s suhoor. Gangs of young boys played soccer in the street under the pitch-black sky. An hour later, as the sun rose over the Eastern Desert, those men, women, and children would all go home to sleep away the day.

We passed over the Low Aswan Dam, site of the old first cataract, and I opened the curtain for a look. Concrete barriers, troop carriers, and soldiers lined the road across the dam. A few miles later, a road sign pointed toward the High Aswan Dam, and then another pointed toward the international airport. We left the city behind, and soon my window stared back at me with a blank face. The road opened to a two-lane highway and our convoy picked up speed. First, one car passed us, then another. Then our driver passed them both, cutting between the cars at high speed within a few inches of their bumpers. Soon several other drivers caught up with us and cut into line. Only the lead and tail vehicles – those minibuses whose passengers included the armed police officers – held their position. No one dared pass the lead minibus, though one silver Mercedes rode neck and neck with it for several miles. I was perplexed. We were in an armed convoy, traveling at the same speed to the same destination. I couldn’t understand why the drivers insisted on this game of cat and mouse. It must be a tactical strategy, to confuse the bandits, I thought, or maybe it was just a habit of bad driving.

I tried to fall asleep but couldn’t. My eyes were closed, but my mind raced along with the traffic. Our convoy entered the Western Desert, a swath of open earth called hamada that spreads across Egypt into Sudan and Libya. Now it’s little more than bare rock, called a deflation zone, but a few thousand years ago it was a savannah. Petroglyphs in the rocky hills record giraffes, ostriches, and cattle. Though it’s a desert, there is very little sand here; the wind blew it away centuries ago. American astronauts train for lunar missions in deserts just like this. The unforgiving landscape, extreme temperature shifts, and remote location approximate the lunar surface.

An hour into our trip, the sun crested the horizon to our left, and its weak rays glowed against the desert landscape: flat, vacant, and inhospitable. I pointed my camera out the window, through a crack between the curtains, and snapped a dozen frames of the blurry, monochrome scenery. The foreground was a gentle sea of undulating, grey bedrock. The ground crested and broke with a gentle splash against the highway shoulder. In the distance, the desert was a rough ocean. It twisted and crashed into itself; low crags of sharp rock scratched against the sky.

For two hours, the only sign of human civilization was a column of transmission towers that carried electricity from the dams at Aswan to the frontier country. There was no opposing traffic. There were no exits. The highway was nothing more than a strip of black asphalt that faded in the distance. There were no guardrails or lights or billboards to crack the monotony. The road serves a solitary existence: every ten miles we passed a sign that counted down the distance to Abu Simbel. There was nothing else between there and Aswan, not for one hundred eighty miles. Hour after hour, the other passengers tossed and turned in their seats. Then, as the sun rose, our reserve driver put his feet on the dashboard and fell asleep, too. Other than me, only the driver was awake, and he was busy ducking between cars in our convoy. I was surrounded by people, but I was alone.

Thirty miles outside of Abu Simbel, we passed through a security checkpoint. The road narrowed and speed bumps rattled the minibus. Armed police formed a loose column on either side of the convoy. I peeked through the curtain and came face to face with a police officer. He stared at me with great contempt. Ten miles later, we passed through a second checkpoint: twenty miles out. Another checkpoint: ten miles out. By then everyone on the bus was awake, albeit barely. The backpackers pried open their breakfast boxes. Inside they found bottles of water and pastries and a small sandwich. They nibbled quietly. Wei woke up shortly thereafter. He checked his two cell phones and put one to each ear. Teresa turned her head toward me and opened one eye. “Are we there yet?”

Our convoy slowed to a crawl, and through the windshield, I watched as the landscape changed. We were on a two-lane road with a tree-lined median strip; palm trees and flowering bushes formed a wall to our right. A few minutes later, the convoy entered a wide-open parking lot on a bank by Lake Nasser. Our driver slammed on the brakes and came to a dead stop in the middle of a lot. The reserve driver jumped out, ripped open the sliding door, clapped his hands twice, and shouted, “Good morning everybody. Welcome to Abu Simbel. Our bus is called Arabesque. Please don’t forget. And be back by ten!”

Under the throbbing sun, tired, cramped, and confused, our party of five strangers stood in the parking lot and watched the minibus drive away. We weren’t alone. Human cargo spilled from other minibuses and a few sedans. The convoy sped away leaving two dozen travelers to fend for ourselves. Our eyes squinted and our brows sweat. We stared at each other – blankly – from across the expanse of black asphalt. Nobody knew where to go. Wei held a cell phone in the air; I couldn’t tell whether he was checking for service or taking a selfie (probably both). The backpackers adjusted their bags and tightened their laces. Teresa searched our guidebook for a map.

Being both impatient and impetuous, I led Teresa on the long march across the pavement, away from the lake, toward a sandstone hill in the distance, where I presumed we would find the temples or a visitors’ center. Wei and the backpackers from our group, equally confused by the lack of signs or information, fell in line behind us. We found the ticket booth behind a small cinderblock building (which housed a pair of aromatic water closets) and waited. The ticket agent, a plump Egyptian fellow, was asleep on a bench under a tree behind us; with every snore, his round belly rose and fell like a volcano not quite ready to erupt. We let him rest for a few minutes until the chatter from the growing line of tourists behind us roused him from his slumber. He shuffled over to the ticket office and crept through the back door.

“Two, please.” The ticket booth was dark and the sun glared off the glass. It was impossible to see through the window. We stared at our reflections in the glass and hoped for the best.

“Two hundred thirty.”

“But the sign says one hundred pound per adult.” I didn’t mean to complain about the cost, I was just confused by the discrepancy.

“Tax. And fee.”

The ticket agent was in no mood to chat; he probably had the same conversation all day, every day, and had no control over the prices. He slid our tickets through the narrow slot under the glass, and we stood off to the side to examine them. Stapled to each admission ticket were two slips of paper. One was a small receipt for the local tax (two pounds), and the other was a larger receipt for a guided tour, the fee for which was included in the new price.

“Would you like a tour?” A young Egyptian fellow, with a name tag on a lanyard, stood in front of us.

“Uh, no, thank you. Shokrun.”

“But you already paid for it. It’s included in your ticket. If you give me your receipt, I will take you on the tour.” He wasn’t aggressive, in fact, he was quite polite; we just didn’t want a tour. (I was cranky, and Teresa was half-asleep.) The guide turned his attention to the line behind us where he found the backpackers, who gladly accepted his offer. We watched a handful of guides scoop up tourists from the ticket line and lead them down a long path, around the sandstone hill, toward the lake. Soon, we were the last holdouts. Where once we had been leaders, we were now followers.

We had read about Abu Simbel, in our guidebook, and on the Internet. The site includes two incredible temples that once sat on the shore of the Nile, on the left bank, just below the second cataract. The twin temples, commissioned by Ramses II, about thirty-five hundred years ago, stood guard between Egypt and Nubia for centuries, but the temples were lost to time and neglect. The wind and river deposited sand and silt over the temples till only traces were left. In the nineteenth century, European explorers, pseudo-archaeologists, classicists, missionaries, and treasure hunters poured over the Egyptian countryside in search of riches. History, sketchy at best here, tells us that a young boy named Abu Simbel met Johann Ludwig Burckhardt, a Swiss explorer, on the latter’s tour of Egypt. The young boy led Burckhardt to the edge of a cliff overlooking the Nile and described the scene below. Burckhardt tried, unsuccessfully, to excavate the site but left it for Giovanni Battista Belzoni, an Italian explorer, who cleared the sand and silt from the temples in 1817.

Freed from the offending matrix, the grand temples attracted hordes of visitors. Trains, horses, camels, and steam ships carried thousands of tourists to Abu Simbel, as the site became known. Women in petticoats carrying lace umbrellas, and men in stiff-collared jackets and silk ascots waddled ashore, carved their initials in the soft sandstone, posed for photographs, and held high tea on the sandy beaches at the feet of Ramses II and his favored wife, Nefertari. Then, in the 1950s, the Egyptian government formed a partnership with the Soviet Union, and together they planned a new dam above Aswan, at the second cataract. The High Aswan Dam project eventually flooded a hundred-mile section of the valley, displaced more than 100,000 people, and covered dozens of archaeological sites including the temples at Abu Simbel. Ramses II and Nefertari were doomed to drown together under Lake Nasser, a massive reservoir named for the man who condemned them. Archaeologists, under the auspices of UNESCO and funded by international donations, developed an incredible plan to save the monuments. Dozens of masons and heavy equipment operators calved the temples from the sandstone cliff and reassembled the blocks on a plateau a few hundred feet above and behind the original site. There the temples would be safe from the rising waters of the nascent lake. The deconstruction and relocation lasted several years, and a temporary dam was built around the temples to protect them from the rising water. (Nasser refused to wait.) With fine detail that would impress the original sculptors, the modern artisans carved the blocks at sharp, almost imperceptible angles to hide the joints they created. Massive cranes hoisted the blocks to safety, where they were reassembled like the world’s largest jigsaw puzzle. The masons carved a million smaller blocks of sandstone and built an artificial hill around each of the temples, like a giant Lego set, to recreate the original setting. With a few additional touches, including a parking lot, hotel, retail pavilion, restrooms, ticket booth, and light show, the relocation was complete and future explorers, like us, would never know that the temples were ever anywhere but here. That was the idea anyway.

The path from the ticket office to the temples was rough, but obvious. It sloped toward the lake, between mounds of yellow, grey, and brown gravel, and around a sandstone hill that rose a hundred feet on our left. From the trail, the hill looked out of place. Its sides were too smooth, and its slope was too steady. It had no color, no depth. As the trail took us closer, the hill looked even less real. I saw the outline of those million sandstone blocks, shaped and smoothed to mimic a natural feature, but the result was imperfect. I felt like I was touring one of those cartoonish casino-hotels on the Strip in Las Vegas. What would we find around the corner? Excalibur? Treasure Island?

First, we reached the Great Temple of Ramses II where four colossi, each sixty feet high, seated on their thrones, guarded the temple gate. Three of the giant statues survived the ages; they look much as they did in antiquity. One statue – second from the left, if you’re wondering – was damaged during an earthquake thousands of years ago. Its head crashed to the sandy beach in front of the temple, and the archaeologists who relocated the temples, being sticklers for preservation, lay the disembodied head at the feet of the colossus from which it fell. Shattered and spilled across the ground, that severed head was still bigger than Teresa.

We approached the temple along a concrete path and crossed into a dark cavern. A platform of wood planking protects the temple floor. The platform leads around the columns in the hypostyle halls, through the various chambers, and back to the sanctuary. The walls are engraved and painted with epic stories of epic battles won by the epic pharaoh. In many images, Ramses II is twice the size of his mortal enemies, and, in one image, he has four arms (two secular, two sacred). The columns are fronted with more statues and a set of four seated statues adorn the far wall of the sanctuary. A string of lights, tucked among the floorboards, cast a dim, yellow glow throughout the temple. Excepting the obvious modern conveniences, the interior, like the exterior, is original, the pieces numbered and dated and signed and relocated. I asked Teresa what she thought of the temple. “Incredible, isn’t it?” She saw the magic, where all I saw was the magician.

I followed Teresa outside, to the Small Temple of Nefertari, a few hundred feet away. Again, the artificial hill looks exactly that, but the façade looks much like it did before it was relocated. Six figures, cracked and chipped by time, tower over the temple entrance. Just inside the door, a guard, hiding out of the sun, checked our tickets and reminded us not to take any photos. Nefertari’s temple looked crisp and clean, as though it were just finished that morning. A wood plank floor followed the tunnels around the temple, and more dim, yellow lights illuminated the rooms from the floor. It was eerie and beautiful and overwhelmingly artificial, like a haunted house at a carnival.

From the temples, we walked to the lake, and stared across the water toward Sudan. Lake Nasser, the reservoir that flooded the valley behind the Aswan High Dam, is a denim-blue sheet of water ringed by grey-brown hills under a sun-filled sky. The incredible feat of engineering that dammed the river is tempered by the enormous environmental depravity. This is the desert; the lake doesn’t belong here. Neither do the temples. Their new home by the lake felt wrong to me. It’s a theme park attraction, reached by a carnival ride convoy. I wanted to be gobsmacked. I wasn’t.

We toured the gift shops and asked for prices at the outdoor café. Everything was plastic and the drinks were warm. Some of the merchants were more aggressive than others, but we understood. They get exactly two chances a day to sell their wares: one morning convoy, and one afternoon convoy. It’s a difficult business model. We sat on a bench under an umbrella where we stole sips of water between sales pitches.

“My friend, do you like cotton? My scarves are the best in Egypt. Feel this. Egyptian cotton. Is no better.” The merchant, dressed in baggy jeans and oversized T-shirt, smiled too widely. His eyes darted from me to Teresa and back to me.

“La, shokrun.” (Sip.)

“My friend, here are pyramids, black, gold, white. Your choice. Good for presents to children or family.” The merchant, a round Egyptian fellow, wore a black button-up shirt, and the buttons threatened to burst at any moment.

“La, shokrun.” (Sip.)

“My friend, where are you from? USA? England?” The merchant held a thick pile of scarves between his hands.

“La, shokrun.” (Sip.)

“No my friend, I do not sell. Please, where are you from?”

“La, shokrun.” (Sip.)

We wanted souvenirs, but we wanted souvenirs crafted in Egypt. The merchants at Abu Simbel stock the same made-in-China plastic replicas sold at sites around Egypt. The parade of merchants continued for several minutes till we gave up our seats and stood under a palm tree near the water closets. From the corner of my eye, I noticed a dark figure lying on the ground, in the shade of a bus on the edge of the parking lot. It was a dog, its hips and ribcage poked through its matted fur. The poor animal panted heavily and stared at us, his eyelids drooped and swollen. Of all the sickly, lonely animals we saw in Egypt – cats, horses, camels – this dog broke my heart the most. I had to turn away, or I might have cried.

“My friend, where are you from? USA? England?” It was the scarf seller from earlier. He was a short, pudgy fellow with thick black eyebrows that cast a long shadow over his face.

“Ireland.”

He stared at me blankly; I might as well have said Mars.

“Excuse me, please?”

“Ireland, it’s a country next to England.”

“Oh, yes. The euro?” He reached into his pocket and pulled out a handful of shiny coins. Suddenly, I understood the question. This wasn’t a hustle; he wanted us to buy his euro coins. Any bank would exchange foreign notes for him, at a fixed rate set by the government, but currency exchange offices refuse coins. So, many Egyptians amass bags of foreign coins – from tips or small sales – that they can never use or exchange. I had made that error at Mena House, when I tipped the porter with a two-pound coin that he could never use or exchange.

“Yes, of course. How much do you have?” I asked.

He fumbled through the pile in his hand, looking for numbers and words he could recognize, but the jumble of designs and characters overwhelmed him. I held out my hands and counted the coins for him.

“You have ten euro. I’ll give you one hundred pound.” My offer was more than fair – the fixed rate was 9.75 pounds to the euro – and our currency trader knew a good rate when he heard one. A few minutes later, he returned with a second, smaller pile. I counted out the coins; they were smaller denominations, including one- and two-cent coins.

“This is seven euro forty,” I said. “I’ll give you seventy-five pounds.”

“Eighty?” The currency trader smiled, and hoped for the best.

“Don’t be greedy. Seventy-five.”

The merchant-cum-currency trader accepted my offer and returned several times with increasingly smaller piles of coins. By the time we were done, I had purchased thirty-four euro in change, for which I paid about three hundred fifty pounds. (I lost about two euro on the deal.) But, in our generosity, we attracted a crowd. Half a dozen merchants surrounded us in the shade of our lonely palm tree. To the Egyptian merchants, we must have seemed like wealthy Europeans, our pockets literally overflowed with foreign currency.

“La, shokrun!” We pushed through the crowd and ran for the safety of our waiting minibus. The crowd followed us. Teresa climbed aboard, and I was right behind her, and the currency trader was right behind me.

“Please, try my scarves. They are very best. I give you a good price!”

“Sorry, I spent all my pounds when I bought the euro from you.” It was true. On each trade, I watched my stash of Egyptian pound notes shrink. When it was over, I only had a hundred pounds left. By the time we got back to Aswan that afternoon, the banks would be closed (Ramadan hours), and they would not open for the next two days. I immediately regretted paying for the Philae hotel in cash, but the currency trader didn’t care about my problems. He tried his sales pitch a few more times.

“Sorry, I have no more pounds.”

“I accept euro! Only five euro, coins are fine.”

“La, shokrun.”

As I climbed aboard the bus, he stopped me one more time. He leaned close, tilted his head toward Teresa, waggled his bushy, Groucho Marx eyebrows, and whispered in my ear, “You are a very lucky man.” His innuendo was very clear and very creepy.

Wei burst onto the minibus with an explosive enthusiasm I have never in my life enjoyed. He spoke quickly, too quickly, and shifted between English and Mandarin. Though we could barely understand his words, his intent was clear: Wei enjoyed the temples. He handed one of his cell phones to us and played an illicit video of him inside the temple with his guide. The guide spoke quickly (in Mandarin) and waved his hands with dramatic flair. He was the perfect match for Wei. Moments later, our American compatriots, the two backpackers, climbed aboard the minibus and Wei handed his phone, video still playing, to them. He asked, repeatedly, what the young men thought of the temples. The backpackers, exhausted and sweaty, were impressed, they admitted, but that wasn’t good enough for Wei. He wanted all of us to be thrilled, like he was. I couldn’t tell whether the backpackers loved the temples; they were too tired to express themselves. Wei buried his face in phones and made two, simultaneous calls.

A few minutes later, our drivers climbed aboard, made a quick headcount – “Five? Anyone missing? Anyone extra? OK!” – and the engine once again roared to life. Our convoy assembled on the tarmac, with the temples and Lake Nasser behind us. We crawled through the narrow streets that led through the checkpoint at the edge of the complex. Then, the race to Aswan began.

It was late morning, and the sun cast a heavy blanket of heat and light over the landscape. The driver turned the air conditioner to full blast. The sound was deafening, but the effort was ineffective. The tinted windows and thin curtains helped, but not very much. Suddenly, I was less worried about bandits and aggressive driving. I worried more about heat exhaustion and suffocation. A vent blew warm, stale air in my face.

Wei spoke first. He asked, nobody in particular, what we thought of Egypt, but he didn’t wait for an answer. “It is beautiful. I love everyone.” He patted the drivers on their shoulders, and the drivers smiled. The two backpackers, we soon learned, were friends from America. They were in their late twenties, and one lived in California, the other in New York. This was their first visit to Egypt; they had arrived a few days earlier, on a whirlwind, last-minute trip. They toured the pyramids at Giza one day, slept on cots in a hostel in Cairo, and then flew to Aswan the day before. They followed their Lonely Planet guidebooks (on-line edition, courtesy of their phones) straight to the Philae and booked their journey a few hours after us. From Aswan, they planned a trip to the Sinai Peninsula, maybe a resort town like Sharm el-Sheikh they said, though they had yet to decide. I asked how they would get there. Their guidebooks and on-line forums suggested a ferry across the Red Sea from Safaga, and they asked if we knew anything about it.

“Closed,” I said, “since the revolution and the coup.”

“Really? That seems to be a running theme,” said one of the backpackers, and he was right. Teresa and I also wanted to visit the Sinai, but Teresa refused to try another bus ride, she would only go if we could fly. (In October 2015, a chartered Russian flight from Sharm el-Sheikh exploded over the Sinai killing all aboard. Suddenly, a bus ride seemed less terrifying.)

“We took a bus down from Cairo to Luxor,” I said. “It was rough, but we made it.”

For the next few minutes, the five of us exchanged travel notes. The backpackers flipped through forums on their phones, while Teresa offered tips from our guidebook. Wei, despite his best intentions, finally fell asleep, and snored with his trademarked enthusiasm. Our conversation with the backpackers twisted and turned around common interests of travel.

“After Egypt, I’m going to Croatia. It’s cheap there, and my friends might join me,” said one backpacker. He reminded me of a young Keanu Reeves, with his dark hair and eyes. His demeanor surprised me; unlike most American men his age he spoke softly and rarely cursed. The other backpacker wore a white baseball hat, his locks of California-blonde hair tucked neatly around his ears. “I might go, too, but I might have to go back to America, for work,” he said with great sadness. The two backpackers, those twenty-something men whom earlier I loathed as they sat quietly in our hotel lobby, turned out to be good fun after all. They were intelligent and polite and suffered the same disease as me: wanderlust. Our conversation turned to prior travels. The four of us recited our travel histories like a game of Boggle, checking off countries we had visited. As each one spoke, the others chimed in:

“Korea.”

“Been there.”

“China.”

“Me, too.”

“Morocco.”

“Oh, I wish.”

The game went on for several minutes till I mentioned a trip, years earlier, to Cuba. The backpackers gasped in agreement. “Yes! I love Cuba! It’s my favorite country.” We spoke at, and over, each other for the next few minutes, describing our island adventures and lamenting the day when Cuba normalized relations with America.

“It’ll be good for the people,” Keanu said.

“But it will destroy the natural beauty,” I argued. “All those virgin mountains and valleys and beaches will soon look like Aruba or the Bahamas. A Denny’s and Hard Rock Cafe on every corner. Drunken college students will pour in for Spring Break and ruin it for everyone.”

We went back and forth for a few more minutes, but one-by-one we fell asleep. I woke up about two hours later, as the minibus took a hard left over the Lower Aswan Dam, on the edge of town. My cheek was covered in drool, and my throat burned. As we all stirred awake, the reserve driver passed back a brown envelope and described the harsh driving conditions, terrible hours, and poor pay. We each dropped a few notes and coins into the envelope and thanked the drivers for the smooth ride.

At the Philae, the desk clerk – the same woman from the day before – greeted us with a great smile and asked about our trip to Abu Simbel, and about our room. She seemed especially curious about our stay. When I told her the room was fine, she refused my answer. I tried to explain that we were really only there for a few hours, but again, she pressed for the truth. Finally, I confessed that the room was a bit stuffy, the traffic was horrendous, but the staff was great. Only then did she seem satisfied, and oddly so. We grabbed our bags from our room and thanked her for the stay.

“No hurry,” she said, “you’re welcome to shower and nap if you like.”

“Thank you, but we have to push on,” we said.

Once more, we walked along the Corniche, this time on the riverside, away from the city. A short while later, we found a serpentine ramp that twisted down the high riverbank, toward the water. At its end, we stood on a lonely dock and waited for the ferry that would bring us to our next hotel: the Mövenpick Resort Aswan, on Elephantine Island, in the heart of the Nile. The resort is a large complex with a tower, barracks, and villas surrounded by lush, green grass, delicate trees, and the gentle blue river. But, from our perch on the dock, we could barely discern the hotel from the sandy hills behind it. The sun’s rays blurred colors and shapes, and I had trouble seeing more than a concrete box across the way. The island itself was a green strip on the near horizon, floating in the river, but the hotel was a mystery. What lay over there, across that blue water?

We didn’t have long to wait. Soon, a bright, white tour boat crossed the Nile from the island and moored at our feet. The captain greeted us with a smile and nothing more. “Mövenpick Hotel?” I asked. He nodded, and we climbed aboard. The captain held out a hand – thick, black, and muscular – for Teresa. Then it was my turn. Despite the good captain’s expertise, I cracked my head as I boarded; I always do. Teresa sat across from me and closed her eyes, while I stared toward the hotel. The sun danced on the river and cast rainbows in the spray. Here, on the fresh water, the air was cooler, almost pleasant.

Two worlds share Elephantine Island. The southern half houses hundreds of families – their homes a fair mix of modern and traditional Nubian architecture. There are also several restaurants and a few shops. Buildings sit at the very edge of the rocky banks, water laps at their foundations. The northern half of the island houses the Mövenpick. The barracks were built in the 1960s, to house thousands of workers from the nearby dam project. Years later, when the dam was finished, the government sold the barracks and the land to a hotel developer. Then came the tower, and the villas, and the shade trees, and the lawns, and a high, stone wall stretched from east to west across the island to keep the southern neighbors from enjoying everything, or anything, the resort has to offer.

The captain docked and pointed up the path, toward the hotel. We strolled up the long path to the tower where we found the reception desk. The lobby – cool and dark and lonely – was filled with empty armchairs and tables. The desk clerk greeted us warmly, and a waiter brought two glasses of karkadé that we gobbled without shame. Though we hoped for a room on a high floor of the tower – with a grand view of the Nile - we lowly soldiers were assigned to the barracks. Even then, our room was large, modern, and perfectly comfortable. The walls were decorated with modern African art. We admired one print in particular: a group of men, tall and thin with deep brown skin, play traditional Nubian instruments, surrounded by geometric shapes in gentle earth tones. I wondered whether we could fit the print in my backpack, but it was fastened to the wall with security screws. Later, we would meander the grounds and eat a quiet dinner in the hotel restaurant, but that afternoon, we just slept away the heat of the day.





By Land and Sea





Our mattress sagged in the middle, and it sagged around the edges, but we were so tired that we slept through the night anyway and woke with stiff backs. Teresa checked her e-mail while I browsed our guidebook to plan our day in Aswan. “We should do a river tour. And see the botanical gardens. And the Nubia Museum,” Teresa suggested. I looked up and realized she wasn’t checking her e-mail at all, she was reading over my shoulder.

Breakfast at the Mӧvenpick was the best yet. The restaurant, buttressed on all sides by floor-to-ceiling windows, was bright and airy, with room enough for a thousand patrons. Once again, it was just us. The hostess assured us there were other people in the hotel. We had just missed a large group, she insisted, and I supposed it were certainly possible. Though the dining room was empty and hushed, long buffet tables covered in white linens filled the center of the room. We filled our plates with fresh pastries, cut fruit, bread, butter, potatoes, and eggs, but, as always, passed on the fuul. The food was glorious and refreshing and neither of us mentioned our recent trips to McDonalds and Kentucky Fried Chicken. Teresa asked whether I felt guilty eating in front of the staff while they fasted for Ramadan.

“No,” I said, and I thought back to the conversation I overheard in Luxor. “They fast as testament of their faith in God, so they’re not suffering at all. If anything, we’re testing their faith, and they’re all doing quite well, I think.”

After breakfast, I asked the desk clerk if there were a bank in the hotel. He led us to a mammoth ATM that promised – in several languages – to exchange currency for us. The idea was simple: touch a button to indicate the currency and volume we wanted to exchange, then touch another button to indicate the currency we wanted. If only life were so simple. We tried to insert our euro, but the machine balked. The clerk tried. Nothing happened. He was devastated and apologized profusely. He called for the manager. “This has never happened before,” the manager cried. The machine would not budge. We tried in English, French, and Arabic. Each time, the ATM asked a series of questions, then sat there and stared at us like a cheeky child. The manager, embarrassed on all accounts, apologized as well. There was nothing he could do.

Teresa and I were in trouble. I had paid for our room at the Philae in cash (I still don’t know why), then we exchanged wads of Egyptian pounds for bags of euro coin for the merchants in Abu Simbel. After a few more expenses around Aswan, we were down to a few torn notes in local cash. In town, we tried every bank on the Corniche, and as promised by the hotel manager, they were closed. Our guidebook suggested we try the American Express office (“Open Fridays,” the book said), but it too was closed – for Ramadan. We resigned ourselves to the terrible exchange rates we would find around town and made our way to the Nubia Museum.

On the way to the museum, Teresa suggested we visit the Old Cataract Hotel, on the banks of the Nile. The hotel, now owned by Sofitel, was built in 1899 by the famed tour company Thomas Cook & Son. At the time, European and American tourists flooded all things classical – Athens, Rome, the Holy Land, and Egypt – and Cook saw an opportunity that few others seemed to understand. International travel had always been popular among Europe’s upper classes – the famed Grand Tour across Europe could take two years – but the industrial revolution created a new group of leisure travelers: the middle class. Cook’s tour company grew alongside the middle class and simplified the very idea of travel for the masses. Beginning with a handful of railway excursions around the British Midlands, Cook slowly built an international tour empire that stretched across Europe, to the United States, and on to Africa and Asia. (Imagine trying to book a room in Rome, from New York, in the nineteenth century. Cook’s company made it possible.) Thomas Cook retired in 1879, but his son and grandsons expanded the agency, and by 1890, they sold more than three million trips each year (and tens of thousands of regional guidebooks). For much of its history, the company contracted all of its services to other companies and took a cut of each sale. They produced a catalog that listed hotels, railroads, steamships, restaurants, and other services, and customers could build a custom tour or select from a pre-set itinerary. Many of the cities they served were well-developed, but some, like Aswan, were small towns with few services. Thomas Cook & Sons saw an opportunity to expand and the company developed several luxury properties, including the luxurious Old Cataract Hotel in Aswan.

Like Mena House in Giza, and the Winter Palace in Luxor, the Old Cataract Hotel attracted the richest and most famous travelers. Their registry claims a laundry list of famous visitors including presidents, princes, prime ministers and at least one writer. Agatha Christie conceived her novel Death on the Nile while staying at the Old Cataract in the 1920s. Many of these famous travelers stayed for weeks or months. They turned the hotel into a home away from home, and the hotel was happy to deliver. Overlooking the Nile and Elephantine Island, the hotel fills several acres with reflecting pools, palm trees, and Moorish-infused Mediterranean architecture. The hotel’s interior complements its grounds in quality and comfort. On our self-guided tour of the hotel (of which I’m sure Cook would have approved) we slowed to a shuffle as we admired the hand-carved furniture, crystal vases set with towering flower displays, and marble floors under glowing chandeliers. We toured the lobby and sat in the plush chairs for several minutes. I wondered whether the Old Cataract Hotel was immune to the rolling blackouts that plagued the rest of the city, and the country. Its clientele would never settle for such an inconvenience, I imagined.

“Maybe we should ask here if they have a bank,” Teresa suggested.

“Well, I don’t see one, but feel free. I’m not moving.” Then I fell asleep, if just for a minute. I woke to find Teresa standing over me. The hotel manager stood by her side. Thin and wiry, he wore a crisp, pressed suit, and a wide grin.

“I understand you would like to exchange some currency. I am happy to help!”

We followed the manager to his desk in the far corner of the lobby where I steeled myself for the tortuous routine that was sure to follow. I reached for my passport and waited for the barrage of paperwork we had witnessed before, but here there was none of that. Instead, the manager asked how much I would like to exchange.

“Two hundred euro, please.”

“Of course!” The manager typed a few keys on a calculator and reached into his desk. With a swift flick of his wrist, he counted off a stack of crisp one-hundred-pound notes. It was, by far, the easiest transaction we experienced in Egypt. On our way out, he asked where we were from, what we had seen, and what we thought of Egypt.

“It’s all beautiful,” we said. “Everyone is very friendly to us!”

“Of course,” he said, “this is Egypt.”

From the Old Cataract Hotel, we turned up the hill, past the Coptic Cathedral we had toured the day before, and found the Nubia Museum right where we left it. It looked much as it had: like a gated chateau sculpted from the hilltop. A circular driveway led past the guardhouse and ticket office to a low-lying, but imposing, wall of pinkish sandstone. A grand plaza offers wide vistas of the surrounding city and river, and a high arch marks the entrance to the museum proper. The museum was surrounded by green grass and shade trees; a luxury of color in a monochrome landscape.

The Nubia Museum opened with great fanfare in 1997. Unlike the much larger, and older, Egyptian Museum in Cairo, the Nubia Museum’s interior was cool and quiet and bereft of visitors. The Egyptian Museum’s windows were painted over, to protect the fragile exhibits from the solar beating, but the Nubia Museum has no windows at all. The lighting – best described as minimalist – accentuates the exhibits as discrete entities; each is bathed in a soft glow. Where the larger Egyptian Museum was overstuffed with ancient treasures, the Nubia Museum floor was sparse in all the right ways. Where the Egyptian Museum swarmed with busloads of sweaty foreign tourists, the Nubia Museum drew only a handful of locals and intrepid explorers, which seems to be part of a trend. Our guidebook described the Nubia Museum as “little-visited,” and that’s a darn shame.

The exhibits, like those of many history museums, follow a chronologic order and trace the history of Nubia and its people from the earliest settlements to the modern era. In the comfort and safety of the museum, Teresa and I quickly drifted apart. I adored the scale models scattered throughout the museum, while Teresa adored them and everything else. I first admired a topographical model of the Nile. It depicted the ancient cities of Upper Egypt and Nubia, two lands with a deep and overlapping history. The model, about twenty feet long and five or six feet wide, sat upon the floor, surrounded by a low glass wall. A handful of small sculptures on one end represented the pyramids at Giza and Saqqara, but the real magic lay a few feet upriver. Here were dozens of tiny sculptures that represented megalithic structures around Luxor and Aswan, the gateway between ancient Nubia and Egypt. I stared at the model for quite awhile. I walked its perimeter and inspected the fine details from several angles. Although I was surrounded by ancient artifacts, the piece I admired most was that modern scale model of the Nile Valley. I forced myself to move along.

Further on the trail through the museum, I passed dozens of statues: some seated, some standing, some with arms crossed, and some with arms straight along their sides. These statues, collected from the valley throughout Lower Nubia, represented centuries of Egyptian authority here. So, too, did the figurines representing Osiris, god of the underworld or resurrection (depending on your personal preference). The Nubia Museum, surprisingly, or perhaps not, focused much of its energy on ancient Egyptian society. There were several displays, tucked among the pharaonic statues and sarcophagi, dedicated to Nubian society. I stopped to admire a display of Nubian weaponry; they were known for archery and horsemanship. A stone comb depicting two giraffes demonstrated the regional climate change over the last several millennia. The area was once a savannah with large herds of megafauna, and the Nubians were accomplished hunters, the placard stated, but the animals are long gone. Another scale model showed a squadron of dark-brown soldiers marching in formation. These Nubian warriors wore short, red and white skirts similar to Scottish kilts or Egyptian shendyt. In their hands, each carried a long bow and several arrows. Later, I admired a diorama that depicted the ancient fortified city of Ikhmindi. Now submerged under Lake Nasser, Ikhmindi was built during the sixth century, about seventy-five miles south of Aswan. Like many ancient cities, it was surrounded by a defensive enclosure wall, several feet thick and topped with parapets. At the city’s center was a large Christian church, one of the last such structures built in Nubia before the Arab invasions in the seventh and later centuries. Radiating from the church, narrow, unpaved roads led through the city to a ring road that followed the enclosure wall. Set between the roads were long, rectangular houses topped by curved roofs called Nubian vaults, but perhaps surprisingly, the diorama represented the city, not at its height, but as it was found in the twentieth century. The defensive walls are just rubble, and there is no sign of life. If not for the placard, I might have guessed I were staring at Pompeii or some other ghost town.

Then, around one corner, I found a series of life-size dioramas that illustrated daily life in antediluvian Nubia; that is, life here before the Aswan High Dam flooded the valley below the Second Cataract. One display depicted a classroom, where the teacher, an adult male sitting on a low bench, led half a dozen students in a lecture. The students, male and female, sat on woven rugs and listened intently. A backdrop, in pale earth tones of blue and brown, showed the Nile and its sandy hills in the background. The classroom, like so much of daily life in Nubia, was outside, under the shade of low palm trees.

The majority of exhibits focused on the megalithic structures of pharaonic Egypt, including the temple complex at Philae. Much like the temples at Abu Simbel, the grand structures at Philae were carefully transplanted during the construction of the Aswan High Dam. Piece by piece, each temple was dismantled and floated by barge, downriver, to an island near Aswan. There, below the High Dam, the temples were reassembled for posterity. Then, of course, followed a large exhibit that celebrated the relocation of the temples at Abu Simbel. A large diorama showed the temples in their original state, on the banks of the Nile, and again, above an imaginary water line, set back from Lake Nasser. Large-scale photographs showed the temples in various states of dismemberment; disembodied heads floated above shoulders, teams of engineers stood on the plateau, surrounded by feet and knees, each carefully numbered and catalogued. A dozen crane operators shifted oversized loads from the riverbank to barges to the cliffs above. The dam project didn’t wait; the water rose in the temples even as the engineers sliced the ancient statues and reliefs from deep inside the hill. I stared at the diorama and the posters for several minutes, equally impressed and depressed by the project it represented. Teresa tapped me on the shoulder and led me outside.

The grounds around the Nubia Museum are as impressive as the exhibits inside – if you know what to look for. A paved trail leads from the museum exit down and around the museum. More shade trees, wild flowers, and climbing bushes line the trail and it’s remarkably pleasant for a short stroll, before the sun eclipses the palm fronds. Behind the museum, the view looks over the nearby Fatimid cemetery. From our shady perch behind the museum, we could see a broad hillside dotted with tombs, including traditional Nubian mud-brick structures, some of which were more than a thousand years old. We took turns spying through the viewfinder in our camera – the zoom feature set to full. Still, even through the glass, the view was hazy, and neither of us could make out much detail. Then Teresa remembered that the Unfinished Obelisk lay on the hillside near the cemetery. Hatshepsut commissioned this obelisk, around 1500 BC, and though no one can say with certainty, it was likely destined for the temples at Karnak. Had it been completed, the Unfinished Obelisk would have stood about one hundred thirty feet tall, and, at more than eleven hundred tons, it would have been the heaviest single stone ever raised by the Egyptians. But the masons discovered a crack within the granite slab before it could be raised, and that fatal flaw was a gift to modern archaeologists. Abandoned in that quarry, the obelisk recorded their masonry techniques. First, workers cleared a sloping plain on the hill, removing sand, dust, soil, and stones till they reached the bedrock. Then, an engineer or master mason inspected the surface and measured and marked the silhouette for the obelisk. Teams of masons dug long trenches, about ten feet deep, on either side of the outline. They smoothed the sides of the would-be obelisk and chipped away at its peak, forming the pyramidal top. Eventually, they would have carved under the slab, to free it from the bedrock, but that’s when a large crack appeared on the surface. The engineers and masons knew there would be no way to raise the stone in one piece. We can only imagine their disappointment, but history preserved the obelisk and it explains a lot about ancient building techniques. Today, visitors can climb the hill, up a set of stairs, and walk along the obelisk, but Teresa and I took the lazy route. We viewed it from our secluded hideaway behind the museum.

“Is that it, over there?” Teresa asked with one eye to the viewfinder.

“I can’t see where you’re looking,” I complained. “Let me look.”

We took turns peering at the hillside through our camera, but never did spy an obelisk, unfinished or otherwise. We later learned it was on the other side of the hill, out of sight.

The museum’s gardens held a few more treats. Dozens of ancient statues and monuments dot the grounds; most feature ancient Egyptian rulers, nobles, and gods, but a few represent Nubian culture. A series of pools and waterfalls cascade through the gardens; they represent the Nile as it crashes along its cataracts on the way through Nubia. (Though on the day of our visit the watercourse ran dry, and all we saw were cement arroyos.) Teresa scrambled down the hill and toured an artificial cave decorated with paintings and petroglyphs meant to evoke an ancient tomb. Meanwhile, I hid in the last few inches of shade as the sun gathered speed and strength on its morning climb.

Teresa wanted to visit the cemetery and obelisk, but I was exhausted, hungry, and drenched in foul sweat. My skin was caked with salt, the white layer of dust that remained after hours of unfettered perspiration. Even with a hat and my cheap sunglasses tucked tightly against my face, I could barely see. So we argued for several minutes, something we often did when the heat or hunger drove us near madness. I walked away, and Teresa sat on a bench till we forgot why we were mad at each other.

We retreated toward our hotel on Elephantine Island, following, as always, the Corniche back toward the ferry slip. Along the way, several boatmen hawked their services. A few tsked at Teresa, but we ignored them. One of the captains trailed us along the road, so we ducked into a small shop for a minute. The shop, little more than a shack really, sat on the banks of the Nile, its front wide open to the road. Mountains of candy, chips, soda, and water filled floor-to-ceiling display racks. We had visited the kiosk a few times on that trip, and, by then, the clerk recognized our faces (mine was brown, Teresa’s a freckled pink) and he welcomed us with both arms.

“Welcome, friends. So glad to see you again. Please take your time.” He reached behind the counter and turned his floor fan toward us. “Where are you from my friends?”

“Cairo,” I said. It was my favorite joke by then, and the clerk laughed.

“Ireland,” Teresa said. She never laughs at my jokes.

“Eye-land?” the clerk repeated.

“Sorry, Eye-r-land.” I clarified, “It’s a small country next to England.”

“I love England!” the clerk exclaimed. “You like football, of course? Liverpool are my favorite team.” He pointed to a poster on the wall behind the register; it featured the team’s crest and slogan “You’ll Never Walk Alone.” “I watch Liverpool on television. They are very famous here. Do you know them?”

“Not personally,” I said, but no one heard my joke. “Of course,” I said, while feigning some interest in the dreaded sport that everyone on Earth, other than Americans, love. “We used to follow Man. U., but David Beckham plays for Los Angeles now, so we like the Galaxy.” (In fact, Beckham, by then had joined Paris Saint-Germain, and then retired, but the polite clerk didn’t bother to correct me. Everything I knew about soccer I learned from reading the LA Times, and it had been awhile.)

Meanwhile, that errant boatman paced outside the shop. He called to us and shamed us for trying to avoid him. He grew angry and stormed into the kiosk. Until then, the clerk had ignored him, but when he trespassed into the shop, the clerk lost his temper. He turned to the man and shooed him away with a string of harsh words and a wave of his hand. Teresa ducked behind me and held my shoulders for safety.

“Those people are trash,” the clerk said. “I am Egyptian, and I am being honest. They are rubbish!”

The clerk collected himself and apologized. We bought our drinks and frozen juice snacks and made our way, by ferry, back to the Mövenpick. We showered and napped and read for several hours, till some time after noon, when we bored of the room. Teresa insisted it were too hot to go outside, but I insisted we do something. I paced the room and pouted and promised we could go wherever she wanted.

“We could go to the Botanical Gardens,” Teresa said. It might be cool enough in the shade.”

After we checked in to the Mövenpick, just the day before, we toured the grounds for an hour or so. We strolled the paved trails around the hotel tower, the barracks, and the villas. Our guidebook mentioned a village on the south end of Elephantine Island (on which the hotel stands), but a high, stone wall stretched from bank to bank and there was no way to reach the village on foot. The wall led us back to the west side of the island where several boatmen lay in the grass or sat on chairs under the shade of mile-high palm trees. We waved to them from afar, knowing we would likely hire one to take us on a tour soon enough. That second day, after touring the Old Cataract Hotel and the Nubia Museum, we followed the trail behind the hotel and found the same group of men sitting in the same seats as the day before. As we neared, one boatman, a large man, with dark brown skin, and hands like sledgehammers, jumped to his feet.

“Yes! Welcome to Aswan. Where are you from?” He held out his hand for a shake.

“We would like to visit the Botanical Gardens. Can you take us there?”

The boatman frowned. His sales pitch followed a routine, and I had strayed from the script. He lowered his hand. “Friend, it is not by the trip, but by the hour.”

“Oh, so how much for one hour?” I asked impatiently.

“Seventy pounds.” The boatman’s price was several times what our guidebook suggested. I could have countered his offer, but I refused. After weeks in Egypt, where every transaction involved a ritual of small talk and negotiation, I had had enough. I turned and walked away without another word. Teresa was mortified and followed slowly behind me. The boatman yelled out behind us, “No, this is not how it works! You are supposed to say your price and we compromise!”

“Where are you going? I want to go to the gardens!” Teresa yelled. She grabbed at my elbow, but I pulled away.

“I don’t know. I can’t do this anymore. We’ll find someone else. Let’s try by the ferry slip, or in town.”

I stormed off and by the time I reached the ferry slip, I was alone. I stood there for a minute and stared across the water at Aswan. It was high noon, there were no shadows in which to hide, and no breeze over the water to cool the air. I was hot and miserable, but not for long.

“Good afternoon.” I turned around and looked up, and up again. There, on the slip next to me, stood one of the tallest men I had ever met; my eyes stared squarely at the breast pocket of his djellaba. He held out his right hand – it was massive – and we shook for a solid minute. His hand – ebony on the back, but dark pink on the palm – wrapped around mine like an oversized and time-worn, leather work glove. The sun bounced off his head and I had trouble seeing his face, but by the short gray hair on his scalp, I guessed he was well in his fifties. “My name is Gin Tonic, and this is my boat, the Nubian Dream.” His left hand swept a long arc across the ferry slip till it stopped by a bright, white tour boat, like those ferries we had used so many times to cross the Nile in Aswan and Luxor.

“Hello,” I replied, my mood suddenly lifted. “We would like to visit the Botanical Gardens.” I pointed across the island, past our hotel, as if there were any confusion about which botanical gardens we wanted to see.

“Yes, the gardens are beautiful. You will love it there. Did you bring lunch? How long do you want to go?”

“We don’t know. How much is the ride?” I asked.

“My friend, you pay by the hour. It is seventy pounds for one hour, less for more.”

Our guidebook, the one we fought so hard to find, was outdated. Where we expected to pay about twenty-five pounds for a roundtrip to the gardens, the boatman had a very different system. “I’m sorry, we just want a roundtrip,” I said.

“My friend, in better times, yes, that was possible. But now there is no business. No tourists come to Aswan since the revolution. And if we take you to the garden who will take you back? There are no boats at the gardens. We must wait for you. So it is up to you.”

He was right, of course, and I felt like a jerk for walking away from the other boatman. Still I felt compelled to negotiate with Gin Tonic. It was the Egyptian way, and I had already insulted one boatman that day. We settled on seventy-five pounds for two hours, and we shook hands again, to consummate the deal. Gin Tonic clapped his hands and called to a boy sitting near the ferry slip. Then he turned to us.

“Please, a few minutes while we fuel the boat. So we don’t have to swim home!”

Gin Tonic handed a crumpled note of local currency to the boy – I couldn’t see its value, but larger notes are usually crisp and clean, so I assumed it was only a few pounds. The boy grabbed a red gas can and ran off. When he returned the canister was full; he struggled to carry it even with both hands, his arms nearly ripped out of their sockets. Then he struggled to lift its spout to the boat’s tank, but even so, he never spilled a single drop of the precious fuel.

A few minutes later, Gin Tonic welcomed us onboard and invited us to sit anywhere. The outboard motor churned the Nile under our feet while Gin Tonic loosened the ropes, and the boy gently pushed us away from the dock. The boat sat lower in the water than the others and Teresa and I looked overboard to see whether we were sinking. (We weren’t.) The sun pierced the river’s surface for a foot or two, and there the water was a pale, translucent blue. Teresa asked Gin Tonic whether there were any crocodiles in the water.

“Not since the dam. But my father and his father remember them. When they were little boys they swam with the crocodiles.” One hand on the rudder, he opened and closed his free hand to mimic a crocodile’s powerful jaws, and we all laughed. Then he told us that before the dam many Nubians lived in the valley upriver, till they were moved, against their will to Aswan. “But it’s OK. Life is good here.” Teresa and I listened to his voice – soft and low like an oboe – and stared into the water. As he spoke, Gin Tonic left the wheel and sat next to me while the boat chugged along. I looked past him and saw our new captain: a little boy dressed in a green shirt and black pants a bit too short for him. He turned the rudder with his right hand, and balanced his tiny body on the railing with his left. He looked very unsure of himself. “This is my son; I am teaching him the family business.”

“He’s so cute,” Teresa said. “How old is he?”

“He is three years old,” Gin Tonic answered. He smiled widely. His son, he said, was a beautiful gift from Allah. Then he asked how many children we had.

“No, we don’t have any children,” I said.

“You are young yet. I hope you will have many sons and daughters. Inshallah!”

Teresa and I smiled and waved to the boy who, barely out of diapers, held our lives in his tiny hands. The boy turned the rudder and we gently turned around the northern tip of our island. Then Gin Tonic began his tour. He pointed up to the sand cliffs on the left bank. There, he said, are many tombs of the nobles; he used to climb in them when he was a boy. There, too, is the famed mausoleum of Shah Aga Khan, an Imam born in British India in the nineteenth century. Erected after his death, in 1957, the pink limestone mausoleum sits at the top of the cliffs, looking east over the river. Inside the mausoleum, a white marble tomb holds the Imam’s remains, and there, everyday, a red rose is laid in his memory. The view, we later read, is said to be incredible, with a sweeping view of the river, the city, and the great Eastern Desert that stretches to the Red Sea. Teresa asked whether we could visit the mausoleum, but Gin Tonic shook his head. “No, it is not for you. Only Muslims.”

By then, we were well within sight of the gardens, and we quickly forgot about the cliffs overhead. Gin Tonic jumped back to the wheel. With a quick turn of his hand, our boat gently bumped against the dock.

“Remember, my name is Gin Tonic, our boat today is the Nubian Dream, and I will meet you in two hours, at the far side of the island, next to the café!”

The Aswan Botanical Gardens occupy the entirety of Kitchener’s Island, a strip of land in the Nile nestled between the left bank and Elephantine Island, where we had started our tour. The island, our guidebook told us, was given to Lord Horatio Kitchener in recognition for his effort to subdue the Sudanese armies in the nineteenth century. Kitchener, often cited as a hero for his campaigns across Africa and India, was an avid collector of tropical plants (a good hobby if you can find the time and money), and he amassed an incredible collection of flora: sycamore, palms, olive trees, papaya, avocado, mango, guava, and star fruit trees among many others. After his death, and after Britain was forced from Egypt, the island and its flora were converted to a public botanical research garden. The result is breathtaking.

From the dock, a flight of concrete stairs led to a guardhouse. The guard, dressed in a loose, white uniform with black trim, sat heavily in a folding chair next to a card table. He was not expecting us, or anyone else, that afternoon. He had left his assault rifle on the card table, and, when he saw us, he jumped to attention. His leg clipped the table and the rifle fell toward the cement floor, but he caught it by the strap just before it landed. Every muscle in my body tightened. I expected the rifle to explode in a hail of unintended fire, but we were safe, and the sudden relief caused us all to laugh. The guard smiled and wrapped his weapon over his shoulder. “Hello, Rambo!” He slapped me on the back, laughed again, and told a joke, I think (he only spoke Arabic), as we paid our entry fee.

We had thought the English gardens around the Mövenpick and Old Cataract Hotels were bucolic oases, especially compared to the desert streets of Aswan and Abu Simbel. Then we saw the verdant forests of Kitchener’s Island. It was a new world, wild and tame and splashed in greens and blues and pinks and yellows. There were no cars, no pollution, no noise other than chirping birds and the Nile’s gentle current breaking at the shores. Until then, we barely realized how much we missed trees and grass after days and weeks surrounded by the monotone deserts. It was, as they say, love at first sight.

Kitchener’s Island, surrounded by the river, far from the city, and shaded by a thousand trees, felt at least twenty degrees cooler than Aswan had been that morning. Suddenly, two hours seemed barely enough time to enjoy the cool, clean air. The gardens, we soon learned, offer seventeen feddans (about sixteen acres) of scenic forestry to tour; a Noah’s ark for tropical plants and curious travelers. The gardens are divided by four linear paths and crossed by a dozen or so shorter paths, so the entire island is a checkerboard of small plots, each carefully manicured, trimmed, and pruned. We passed several long benches that overlooked the river and pagodas draped with climbing vines. Teresa fell in love with some blue flowers, and I filled a dozen frames with shots of tall palms against the dark blue sky. Near the southern tip of the island, we found a café and a small park that overlooked a lagoon covered in water lilies. I stopped to read a sign that described the island (where I learned about the feddans) and its plants (drawn from equatorial regions around the world) while Teresa inspected a row of flowering bushes. I looked toward the dock to see if Gin Tonic were there waiting for us. Luckily, he wasn’t, so we took a second loop of the island.

At the end of our second loop, we spotted the Nubian Dream at the dock and begrudgingly made our way down to the water. Gin Tonic was happy to see us and asked what we thought of the gardens. His son was fast asleep in a cubby hole under a bench. “He is tired, he wants to be like his father, so he won’t eat or drink now for Ramadan.” Back on the river, Gin Tonic pushed the outboard motor against the drifting current. Just under the river’s surface, tall, freshwater grasses reached up toward the sun; they swayed gently in the current, like leaves on a tree. Gin Tonic continued his tour. He pointed toward Elephantine Island and the Nubian villages that filled the southern half – unreachable from our hotel. Teresa asked about the village.

“It is lovely, many families live there, and there are two restaurants, but they are closed now. I can take you later, if you like.” He pointed to a group of boys jumping off the rocks into the river. “When I was a boy, I swam in the river every day. But it’s not for you. You will get sick. Live here for two years, then you can drink the water!” We turned around the southern tip of the island and Gin Tonic cut the motor. Then we drifted north, downriver, in the gentle current. We passed the Old Cataract Hotel on our starboard, Elephantine Island to our port side. “See there, in the rocks? Those are Egyptian carvings from pharaohs!” Several sets of hieroglyphs lined the boulders in the water. Teresa asked Gin Tonic if he knew what the glyphs meant, but it was a mystery. “I can read it no more than you,” he said with a smile.

Later that afternoon, we enjoyed a lazy dinner at the hotel restaurant. I ordered a vegetable pizza (not bad) with a green apple Fanta (disgusting), and Teresa had the kofta sandwich (a spiced beef meatball) with iced tea. Afterward, I went back to our room and washed a load of clothes in the sink. Teresa took the elevator to the roof-deck on the tower and watched the sun set behind the sand dunes, over the Western Desert. She desperately wanted to visit the oases there, and being so close to the left bank made her dream of a few nights under the stars. If not for the high holiday, and the extreme weather, and the extreme danger, we might have made it. Instead, we gave up on the Western Deserts, and set our eyes, once more, on Luxor, and, from there, the Red Sea.





Luxor Interlude





At the train station, the next day, we waited in line by the ticket window, behind a dozen men dressed in sweat-soaked shirts. By twos and threes, they approached the window and waved fists-full of paper money and handwritten notes. They shouted and shoved, but the ticket agent, whom we could see through the clear glass window, sat quietly and patiently listened to each of them. Slowly, in twos and threes, the men in those sweat-soaked shirts walked away with fists-full of tickets, and still they shouted and shoved. After twenty or so minutes, it was our turn. I heaved my backpack off my shoulder and dumped it on the counter in front of me, to reveal my own sweat-soaked shirt. I smiled and asked for two first-class tickets for the three o’clock train to Luxor. The ticket agent stared at me, and listened, just as he had with every passenger before us. Then, without blinking, he recited a long, and seemingly practiced exegesis, in Arabic. He explained the error of our ways, the state of the world, and the future of train travel in Egypt. Of course, we had no idea what he really said, but his point was obvious. Just in case, he pointed a finger toward the tracks outside, and said, “Tren.” In other words, buy your tickets onboard.

With an hour to kill, we roamed the small station, though there was nothing to see. Teresa dropped her bag at my feet and went to look at the ticket vending machine. She was worried, once again, about buying tickets onboard. What if they’re sold out or won’t take our money? She pecked at the ticket vending machine for a few minutes and checked departures in several languages. The stubborn machine refused to print any tickets, though it did confirm our scheduled departure time. We recalled the fateful words we heard in Luxor, a few days earlier: Schedules are recommendations, not promises. With nothing else to do, we stepped outside to look for our train.

These days, Aswan is the southern terminus for all train travel in Egypt, and the tracks that day were full of idled locomotives trailing long lines of rusted cars. Two trains, in faded yellow paint, their windows cracked, dangling, or missing altogether, looked like the local trains we were warned not to take. They’re slow. They stop in every village! The seats are broken slats of wood. The warnings were pointless; even if we wanted to ride the local trains, we weren’t allowed. We looked around the platforms for an intercity train, and we saw two: one on the platform next to the station, and one on the far track. A handful of passengers milled about the doors of each train, but there were no signs or announcements to direct wary passengers like us. Two teenage boys asked where we were going (not that it mattered; from Aswan all trains stop in Luxor), and pointed to the train on the far platform. We climbed down the stairs, through the smoke-filled tunnel, and up the far staircase. We looked for a car with the familiar I that indicated first class, but two women stopped us. They asked – in fluid English – if we were headed to Cairo or Luxor. Then they pointed us back to the train on the first track, nearest the station. We climbed back down the stairs, rushed through the smoke-filled tunnel, and climbed the staircase again. I saw the two teenage boys from earlier. They stared at their feet, embarrassed for sending us the wrong way. I thanked them again – Shokrun! – for trying to help, and we boarded our train.

The car was a mess. The last few rows were full; the other seats were open but covered in trash and stained with a lifetime of neglect. We picked a row near the middle of the car. The floor was covered in crumbs and wrappers, so we held our bags on our laps, and leaned forward to let the cool cabin air dry our backs. Something brushed my shoulder. Two men – a father and his adult son – stood in the aisle next to me. They passed a train ticket back and forth, pointed at me, and shouted at each other. I told Teresa that we would have to move, and we gathered our bags. But the young man took a single seat across the aisle from us. I motioned that we would be happy to move, but he waved us off and turned to read his newspaper. We were safe in those seats, if only for a little while.

I had noticed, the day before, that my cell phone, though it had no voice or data service in Egypt, connected to the local cell towers, and kept the right time. So when we felt the train lurch to a start, I checked my phone and saw the time: three o’clock on the dot. A few minutes later, the conductor came by to collect tickets. I held out a hundred-pound note and said the only phrase that mattered: “al Uqṣur.” Without a word, he stamped two tickets, handed them to me, collected the fare, and moved on to the next row.

“Did you get the change?” Teresa asked.

“Forget it, I’m just happy to have a seat and ticket,” I answered.

We settled into our seats. Teresa studied our guidebook and read once more about Luxor and the Red Sea resort towns, while I stared past her, out the window at the moving terrain. The train rocked violently from side to side, and jumped an inch or two at every revolution of the wheels under our seats. Suddenly, the filthy seats and floor seemed unimportant. I worried about our car derailing. Some stretches were worse than others, and I realized that the train and its trucks were fine. It must be the rails, I thought, the extreme heat over the last few days must have buckled the steel rails. I pictured the train rolling over the buckled tracks and felt the rhythm in my skeleton. Thump, thump, thud. A moment later, the air-conditioning sputtered and spat and hissed to an unceremonious death. I closed my eyes. A drop of sweat trickled from my forehead, across my brow, down the slope of my nose, and landed on my upper lip. I wiped it away with my forearm. Another drop of sweat began its slow crawl down my face.

About an hour later, the train slowed as we entered a station at the edge of a large town. There were no announcements, and if there were any signs on the platform, we couldn’t see them. A few passengers lunged at the car door and jumped to the platform. On their way out, they pushed past a crowd of men, women, and children, each with arms loaded with bags and suitcases. Somewhere a baby cried. All this while the train rolled along the platform. Soon the aisle filled with shuffling, sweating bodies. Hips, elbows, and asses of every shape and size bumped and ground their way over my left arm and shoulder. I leaned against Teresa, to make room for the crush of human flesh. Through the crowd, I saw swinging luggage, bags of fruit, and jugs of erk sous. I wondered where all these bodies would fit. There were a few open rows, but there were far more bodies in the aisle than there were seats on the car. To my left, I heard a man yelling at another passenger. It was the fellow whose seat we had taken in Aswan. I told Teresa, again, that we would have to move, though I couldn’t imagine where we would go. The young man whose seat we had taken in Aswan apologized (I presume) and explained (I presume) that he had no choice but to claim his assigned seat. He showed his ticket to me, pointed at the jumble of Arabic characters, and frowned. We grabbed our bags and stood in the aisle, with nowhere to go. Just then the train lurched to a start (in fact, I’m not sure it ever came to a full stop at the platform) and the aisle cleared. Men, women, and crying children ran for the door and scattered across the platform. They weren’t passengers at all; they were just there to help their friends and family aboard. We found an open row near the front of the car, and plopped down into our new seats. We couldn’t know for how long we would have those seats, so we never relaxed.

Over the next two hours, the train made several crawling stops just like this. We thought we’d recognize a town or two from our trip down a few days earlier, but we never did. There was no hint of the blue river, or the green fields we had admired on the way south. There were no boys pushing tires down dirt roads like we’d seen before, and no beehive tombs to admire. I sorely missed Mr. Hussan, the man we had met on our southbound train. I could have used a friendly face then.

At one stop, two men stood in the aisle next to us. They wore slacks and polo shirts, but unlike most other passengers they weren’t surrounded by their families and friends; they seemed to be traveling together. Then I realized that they didn’t have a mountain of luggage and food like so many other passengers (ourselves included). Instead, each carried a newspaper and small handbag fit for a day trip. Then one of the men lifted his arm and placed his newspaper on the overhead rack. When he did, I noticed that he carried a large handgun in a holster tucked in his waistband. I turned my head and looked at the other fellow. He too wore a handgun, tucked under the waistband of his slacks, hidden under his crisp, white polo shirt. The two men said something to the fellow sitting in the row ahead of us, and that passenger quickly moved to another car. The armed men sat in the seats directly ahead of us, and I wondered whether the conductor called ahead to report two foreigners on his train. Did we merit a private security detail? I wondered. Days later, while searching for train schedules to Alexandria, I found an interesting passage on the Egyptian National Railways website. It read:



The Tourist groups are not allowed to reserve from the Internet. Their Travel Agent in Egypt should contact ENR (Egyptian National Railways) central sales department - ramses square for further information where special travel and security arrangements are made.



We hardly constituted a tourist group in any sense, but if the men seated ahead of us were, in fact, a security arrangement, I was happy to have them.

Just before six o’clock, we grabbed our bags and stared out the window. We searched for any hint of Luxor. By then, the sun was low over the western horizon and the passing landscape was a blur of unrecognizable shadows. When the train slowed, we jumped for the door and pushed through the crowd and on to the platform. We were back in Luxor, and it felt like home.

We had reservations at the Sonesta St. George, where we had stayed earlier in our trip, and decided to walk from the station. The hotel touts followed us to the front of the station. Hotel! No reservations? We have room! And my personal favorite: You cannot go that way, there is nothing to see! In front of the station, we pushed through a crowd of taxi drivers. Where you go next? You know the price? Tax! Tax!

We followed the road toward the river. Traffic was thin, so we walked in the street, with everyone else. The shops were closed, but we smelled meats grilling and breads baking; the city would break fast as soon as the sun set, and the streets would fill with families celebrating another evening’s iftar. The festive mood was short-lived. Like many holidays, Christmas included, Ramadan brings out the best and worst in people. Fasting in the middle of summer can drive people crazy; arguments and fights are common. Halfway down the road, Teresa spotted a crowd on the sidewalk. “Are they fighting?” she asked. I heard people yell, but couldn’t see through the shifting mass of robes and heads. As we got closer, the crowd moved into the street, and when they did I saw two men at the center of the circle, their arms flew in every direction. One of the men fell to the ground, and the crowd moved in closer. I couldn’t see what happened to the man who landed on the pavement, and I didn’t want to know. We crossed the road and walked as quickly as our heavy bags would allow. “Don’t look back,” I said. “Don’t look back.”

Our room that night was awful. During our previous visit, we stayed in a river-view room, with a lovely bed, large bathroom, and a balcony that overlooked the Nile (and the neighboring sewage treatment plant). Though the view from that room was great, we wanted to save a few dollars on our return trip, so I reserved a city-view room. The room was about the size of a walk-in closet. The twin beds were hard as rocks; I guessed they were just box springs set on box springs with no mattresses at all, but Teresa insisted I was crazy. The noise from passing traffic was bad, but the noise from the service quarters next door was even worse. Then, later that evening, we noticed a foul smell, like burning plastic. At first it was faint, like someone was smoking next door, but the odor grew stronger and more foul. We looked out the window and saw the bright glow of a large fire, about a block away. It flickered and wavered for a minute then exploded in a ball of yellow and red. Even over the sound of traffic, I heard the flames pop. The glow from the fire lit up the sides of several buildings, and the smoke cast a shadow over the street. We closed the drapes and went to bed.

In Luxor, we meant to relax for a few days and prepare for the next leg of our trip. Convinced by then that we would never make it to the desert, we looked forward to the Red Sea instead. In the morning, we took turns reading our guidebook and looked for ideas. El Gouna sounded pleasant and laid-back, Safaga sounded small and scruffy, but Hurghada – that city loved by hordes of Russian travelers – sounded like a good mix of the two. The question, as always, was how to get there. For all the tour buses traveling to Luxor from Hurghada every morning, there were none from Luxor to Hurghada. We decided to visit a few tour agencies around town, to ask for help, though we knew what to expect.

Meanwhile, I wanted to switch rooms. Teresa thought it was a waste of time – it would be OK for a couple days, she insisted. But I knew the hotel had much better rooms, and I wanted one. Teresa showered and packed while I went to the front desk.

“But you booked a city view.” The clerk, a pleasant young woman, was shocked and distressed by my request.

“Yes, but the beds are very hard.”

“Would you like a different city view? You can try the beds first.”

“But the room is very small. Do you have larger city view rooms?”

“No, all the rooms are the same size.”

“But the room is very noisy. It’s next to the service quarters.”

“I will ask them to be quiet.”

“We stayed in a great room last time, on the fifth floor. Is it available?”

“No, I’m sorry, the fifth floor is full. We are very busy, for Ramadan.”

I looked around the lobby; there was not a soul to be seen.

“Perhaps on another floor then?”

“No, the other floors are closed.”

“For Ramadan?” I asked.

“Please. I must speak with my manager.”

A few minutes later, the manager, whom we had met during our earlier stay, met me at the front desk.

“Yes, sir. It is a pleasure to see you again. I understand that you don’t like your room?”

“Well, the beds are hard as rocks. And it’s very small. And very loud,” I said.

“Of course, the room is not good for you.”

The manager, John, showed me to a room on the fourth floor. It was the same room we had before, just one floor lower. “Don’t blame our clerk, please. She can only do what the computer says. But,” he continued, “we must make all of our visitors happy. Business is very slow and tourists are important to our city. If you need anything, please let me know!”

A few minutes later, Teresa and I dropped our bags on the floor of our new room. We inspected the balcony, the bathroom, and the beds. The room was glorious, for exactly two minutes. That’s when a woman in the room next door started yelling bloody murder.

“What the hell is that?” Teresa asked.

“I think we should have stayed in the other room,” I said.

The woman next door screamed, and then she screamed louder; about what, and at whom, we could only imagine. I was sure she was ready to kill someone.

“Are you going to call the manager?”

“Let’s go for a walk and find lunch. Maybe she’ll check out before we get back.” I was frustrated and embarrassed. It was my idea to switch rooms, and I couldn’t imagine calling John for a new room.

“No, call someone now. I don’t want to be here if there’s a crazy woman next door.”

John was surprised to hear from me, but when I explained what happened he promised to come upstairs right away. A moment later, I heard someone outside our room; it was John, and he paced back and forth. Even through the peephole, I could tell that he was upset. I joined him in the hallway and closed the door behind me.

“Sorry, John, but my wife is nervous about the screaming. Can I help?”

“I am very worried.”

I wanted to ask what the woman was screaming about, but there was little point.

“I called my manager,” he said. “He told me to speak with the woman, but I am scared. I might call the police.” John was nervous – there was something seriously wrong in that room. The woman never stopped screaming. In fact, she got louder by the minute.

Teresa and I went for a walk. We had toured most of the city by then, but there was a stretch of town south of the hotel that we had never seen. It was Sunday morning – normally a busy time in Luxor – but the streets were quiet. Even the hantour and taxi drivers ignored us. We found another stretch of British-themed shops; their steel shutters pulled tight for the season. Teresa stopped to pose for a photo next to a jewelry shop called Lancashire Jimmy. (This was particularly funny to us because we have a friend from Lancashire named, unsurprisingly, Jimmy.) On our way back to the hotel, we stopped for lunch at an English-themed café. The owner remembered us from our earlier trip and asked about our adventure. We chatted for quite awhile; we were in no hurry to get back to our room, and the café owner seemed to enjoy our company. We mentioned moving on to Hurghada, and she suggested a resort that she and her husband liked. “Watch out for the Russians,” she warned. “They’re loud and pushy. They don’t queue for anything. They fill their plates with food they’ll never eat, and they’ll complain about the mess even though they’re the ones who made it!” We laughed, but she wasn’t kidding. After lunch, we stopped by Arkwright’s for snacks and drinks, but mostly we were killing time. There, too, the owner recognized us from our earlier trip and asked about our adventure to Abu Simbel. Once more, we chatted with the fellow for quite awhile. We talked about the weather, business, football, and all those small things, but eventually we ran out of topics. It was time to go back to our room.

Our neighbor must have been waiting for us. About a minute after we got back to our room, she started screaming. Teresa scowled, and I went straight to the lobby to ask for a new room. On my way to the elevator, the mean, nasty screaming woman burst into the hallway. She was a large, older woman dressed in a black abaya. The floor shook as she stormed toward the elevator bank. She seemed to ignore me, but her timing was too close to be a coincidence. Was she mad at me? Why was she in the hallway with me? I watched her get in an elevator, and then I took the stairs to the lobby. The nasty woman sat in the lobby and waited, for what I can only guess. I must have looked as angry as I felt because the desk clerk already had a different room ready for us. The new room was on the same floor, but across the hall and a few doors down from the nasty woman. It would have to do. I thanked the clerk and waited by the elevators to go back upstairs. Then I heard more screaming. I turned around and there was the nasty woman, standing by the front desk, screaming at the clerk. By then I was sure she was screaming about me, for what I’ll never know.

Once more, Teresa and I packed our bags and moved to our new room. I brought our old keys back to the lobby and climbed back upstairs. When I got back to our new room, I couldn’t believe what I saw. The nasty woman had also switched rooms – next door to us. I ran back downstairs and found John, the hapless manager, at the front desk. He looked ready to cry, scream, or jump out the window. “Don’t worry! We’re moving her to a new room. You’ll have quiet.” He couldn’t – or wouldn’t – tell me why the woman changed rooms, but they moved her to the far end of the hall, and we never heard or saw her again.

Later that afternoon, in Little Britain, we found a small travel agency. Set on a side road across the street from a few restaurants, and tucked between a pharmacy and an apartment building, the office was dark and hot. The stale air was filled with dust. When I opened my mouth to ask a question I choked and coughed, and tried again. The agent, a middle-aged fellow with short dark hair and a scruffy beard, was surprised and excited to see us, until I told him what we wanted.

“It is very difficult,” he said, “to arrange for long tours this time of year. The drivers don’t like to be on the road during the day. They cannot eat or drink, and they are very tired. Perhaps you would like to fly? Or you can try a tour from Cairo. But I don’t know.”

We returned to the café where we had lunch earlier that day. We ordered frozen fruit drinks and ignored each other for a good while. The café owner asked if we had any luck booking our trip to Hurghada.

“The drivers are insane you know,” she said. “They only want to drive at night, but this time of year they sleep all day and eat all night. I don’t know who would be crazy enough to go during the day. They’ll be exhausted you know, and hungry and thirsty. You’ll find someone, I’m sure, but check the car first. You don’t want to break down on the side of the road in the desert. No one will stop for you unless they want to rob you.” She laughed, but, again, she wasn’t kidding.

On our way back to the hotel, I had an idea. There was a taxi stand down the road, in front of another hotel, where I had met a few taxi drivers the week before. Most of the cars parked out front were tired heaps of steel and glass that would never make it past the first police checkpoint on the road to the Red Sea, but a few taxis held promise. There was one driver in particular that I remembered. He always greeted us with a wave and a smile, and I appreciated his laid-back personality.

“Hello, my friend. How are you today?” The driver called himself Mr. Fish. Of course, that wasn’t his real name, but it took him awhile to admit that much. (Another driver in Luxor, whom we saw but never met, called himself “Mr. Chips.”)

“We are good,” I said. “But we need a ride.”

“Yes, friend, of course, I am here for you. Where you like to go?”

“We want to go to Hurghada.”

Mr. Fish frowned. “Hurghada? Red Sea? It’s far. I don’t know.”

“Yes,” I said, “we want to visit the Red Sea for a few days. But there are no buses or trains there.”

“Maybe you should fly?” Mr. Fish wanted to help, but when I mentioned Hurghada, he was caught off guard. “Hurghada is very far. When do you want to go?”

“Tomorrow morning.”

“No, we can only go at night. The sun is too hard.” He held up his hand to the sky and blocked the bright white light from his eyes. Mr. Fish rubbed his chin. “For Hurghada, it is two hundred miles. The fare is five hundred fifty pounds.”

“Does your car have air-conditioning?”

Mr. Fish led me to his car and started the motor. I sat in the passenger seat while he adjusted the temperature and turned the fan to full speed. The air was dry and warm; after a few minutes, it cooled but never turned cold. I understood why he didn’t want to drive across the desert during the day in that car.

“You’re right,” I said, “Hurghada is very far. We’ll find another way.”

Mr. Fish panicked. He had talked himself out of a paying fare. “Wait. Maybe my boss’ car is better? It is new.” He asked me to wait while he made a phone call. “My boss says OK. I can bring the car to you this afternoon. If you like the car I can take you tomorrow. But the fare is six hundred pounds, because the car is new. And, of course, baksheesh is welcome.”

Mr. Fish met us in front of our hotel, later that afternoon, right on time. His boss’ car was a late model Toyota Corolla with shiny, black paint. The windshield wiper flapped in the breeze, but the tires were solid and the motor hummed gently. I put my nose to the hood and inhaled deeply; there was no smell of burning oil or sickly sweet coolant. The car seemed fine. Best of all, the air-conditioned passenger compartment was ice cold. We shook hands and agreed to meet in the lobby the next morning at ten o’clock.

On our walk back to the hotel, two teenage boys passed by on a motor scooter. The passenger called out to me, “How much? I will give you one million camels for the woman!” He and his friend laughed as they drove away. Teresa scowled, but I laughed. “What? It was a good price,” I said.



⁂



The fourth floor that night was a busy place. Most of the rooms were occupied, not by the usual sunburnt tourists, but by Egyptian families celebrating the holiday. The hotel restaurant, closed by day during Ramadan, opened for room service a few hours after the Maghrib prayer and didn’t close till Fajr the next morning. So, while Teresa snuggled under her duvet and dreamt about snorkeling in the Red Sea, I lay awake and listened to the rhythm of the hallway. It began sometime after midnight as a porter pushed a squeaky service cart past our room – chirp chirp chirp. Somewhere down the hall a door opened, words were exchanged, trays and dishes and glasses rattled, and the door slammed shut. Next, a furious chirp chirp chirp as the porter quickly rolled the service cart back to the elevator and down to the restaurant. The scene repeated on an endless loop throughout the night. I don’t know what was on the suhoor menu that night, but it was very popular.

Unable to sleep, I stared at the ceiling and wondered what the next day would bring. Our route to Hurghada would cross the Eastern Desert and the Red Sea Mountains, to which our guidebook – despite its glowing review of the region – devoted a few slim pages. The area, it told us, is vast, desolate, and laced by ancient trade routes. Though it described the desert and mountains as fascinating – highlights include Roman ruins and petroglyphs – the route sounded foreboding. All of the roads through the desert require a guide, it said, and many of the roads are completely closed to foreigners. Teresa worried about marauding bandits and roving militants in balaclavas, but I worried about heat stroke and flat tires. “I doubt Mr. Fish has triple-A,” I said.

After staring at the dark ceiling for an hour, and sure that if the noise in the hallway couldn’t wake Teresa then nothing would, I turned on my computer and searched the Internet for books about Egypt’s Eastern Desert. Luckily, it seemed that anyone who ever set foot in Egypt wrote a book about it (ahem) and the Eastern Desert is no exception. I found books about the desert’s flora, fauna, geology, earthenware, petroglyphs, and Roman ruins. Much of what I found were academic texts, but I found a few general interest titles to keep me company. I started with two giants of classical Greek literature: Herodotus and Strabo, each of whom describe Egypt, but, just as our guidebook glossed over the Eastern Desert, so too did the classics. In Herodotus’ Histories, I read that the “Arabian range of hills” travels unbroken to the Erythraean Sea, a journey, the author was informed, of two months from east to west. (His informant must have traveled with Harmony Jet.) Strabo, in Geographica, had a bit more to say. He called the Eastern Desert an isthmus between the Nile and the Arabian Gulf where, in the delightfully vague era he called the “earlier times,” camel-merchants crossed the desert by night, guided only by the stars. Their trip took a sprightly six or seven days, and passed the mines of smaragdus (emeralds) where the Arabians (to Strabo, everything east of the Nile was Arabia) dug deep tunnels in search of precious stones. The place names have changed over the years, but the scenes – as colorful as they were brief – may well have been ripped from a Tolkien novel.

Next, I buried myself in an epic tome by James Bruce, a wealthy British consul who, in his spare time, crossed Egypt and Ethiopia to find the source of the Nile. He immortalized his journey in a five-volume series, Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile, In the Years 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772 and 1773 (gone are the days of one-word titles), in which he recounted adventures worthy of Baron Munchausen. Bruce’s journey is filled with liars, thieves, beggars, and murderers. Even Encyclopaedia Britannica called Travels “one of the epics of African adventure literature.” Given the late hour, I focused my attention on the second volume, which, at five hundred pages, was more than enough to fill the rest of my night.

When I met Bruce, he was on an extended tour of Upper Egypt where he visited tombs and temples, but he was no casual tourist. Bruce was an explorer, an intellectual, and a master orator who spoke Arabic and Ge’ez (the latter of which is now extinct) and loved the region and its antiquities. On his tour, he investigated the hieroglyphs (indecipherable at the time), he healed an important sheikh who then promised safe passage across the desert (with mixed success), and, for the readers’ edification, he later deconstructed Eratosthenes’ method for calculating the circumference of the earth. Bruce was on a mission, so he abandoned Upper Egypt and traveled downriver from Luxor to Qena. There, he joined a caravan en route to Al Qusayr, an ancient port city on the Red Sea, where he, and thousands of Muslims on their hadj, would continue on to Mecca. The caravan followed the Wadi Hammamat, an ancient trade route across the Eastern Desert and Red Sea Mountains. That’s where the trip got interesting.

On the first day out, he wrote, the caravan traveled a few miles and passed “a dirty village,” a “very dirty village,” and a town which was “no town, but some sand and a few bushes so called.” He described the Abebde Arabs, who inhabit the region, as “a band of savages, whose only trade was robbery and murder,” and the Azaizy Arabs, to Bruce, were a “poor inconsiderable tribe.” And though the caravan was defended by a legion of armed guards, Bruce described their security detail as “a set of thieves” that would run at the first sign of trouble. He even hated the antelope he hunted: “very ill roasted they were; and execrable meat, though they had been ever so well dressed, and had the best sauce in Christendom.” (Perhaps he should have tried the fuul.) Nor did Bruce think much of the desert landscape. In his Travels, which is otherwise filled with minute descriptions of zoology, botany, astronomy, meteorology, anthropology, and page after page of painfully descriptive geology, he described the Eastern Desert with a few bleak sentences:



There are not even the traces of any living creature, neither serpent nor lizard, antelope nor ostrich, the usual inhabitants of the most dreary deserts. There is no sort of water on the surface, brackish or sweet. Even the birds seem to avoid the place as pestilential… The sun was burning hot, and, upon rubbing two sticks together, in half a minute they both took fire, and flamed.



After reading Travels, I wondered whether it were too late to book a flight to Hurghada.

The rest of Bruce’s journey, which I won’t spoil here, reads like a modern political thriller filled with threats served, quite literally, over a cup of coffee. He reached Al Qusayr after seven days during which he made a few friends and a few thousand enemies. Teresa and I could only hope for a better journey. I left Bruce when he reached the Red Sea, and I drifted to sleep just as the sun rose above the hills east of Luxor.





A Sleepy Fishing Village





Teresa tapped me on the shoulder. “I think that’s him,” she said. Mr. Fish was a few minutes late, but so were we. When he parked in front of the hotel – in his boss’ shiny, black Toyota – we were still in the lobby of the hotel bank exchanging another roll of euro for pound. The teller that morning was in no hurry and spent more time than usual inspecting my passport. (I must admit that most people find me highly suspicious.) So, while we waited for the teller, Mr. Fish waited for us. He sat on the car's rear bumper and wiped his brow until a police officer shouted for him to move along. The two waved their arms about and shouted back and forth. Mr. Fish begged and pleaded and pointed toward the hotel until the officer relented with a final angry backstroke in the air. The teller cleared his throat to get my attention, and he slowly counted out our stack of cash. Then he asked me to count it back to him. Poor Mr. Fish! I thought.

“Good morning. Are you ready for today?” Mr. Fish spoke slowly and softly, like his words were a little too heavy that morning.

“Mr. Fish! You look tired. Are you ready?” I asked.

“Yes, of course! I slept extra late today. Usually I get up at six o’clock, but today, for you, I sleep more, till eight!” Mr. Fish started to yawn, but with a bit of effort he forced his jaws closed, and pretended to smile.

“The car looks great,” I said. “Can I drive?”

Mr. Fish laughed and held out the keys to me. Then he realized I was serious.

“No, my friend. Only Egyptians can drive in the desert. For you it is too dangerous. The drivers are crazy. And the police…” His voice trailed off before he could finish his sentence, but his sentiment was clear: little has changed since Bruce’s travels across the Eastern Desert.

Mr. Fish opened the doors for us. Teresa sat in the back seat, next to our bags, and I asked her if she wanted me to sit with her. “There’s no room for you,” she said with a laugh. She was right, but there wasn’t much room for me in the front seat either. Foreign cars always make me feel six inches taller and a hundred pounds heavier than I really am. Even with my seat all the way back, my knees barely cleared the dashboard. I struggled to get comfortable while Mr. Fish fiddled with the air-conditioning and radio. He asked me if the mirrors were alright, which I thought was a strange question, but, just in case, I reached up and adjusted his rearview mirror for him. Mr. Fish looked at me for a moment, but didn’t say anything. A few minutes later, when he was sure I wasn’t looking, Mr. Fish moved the mirror back. I must have misunderstood his question.

Just north of Luxor, we reached the first security checkpoint along the river road to Qena. Mr. Fish jumped on the brakes with both feet, and my seatbelt snapped across my chest. I looked back to check on Teresa, but she was busy staring at the flowering bushes that lined the avenue. As we neared the guardhouse, a police officer raised his hand and leaned forward to inspect our faces through the windshield. I waved and nodded, but Mr. Fish kept both hands on the wheel and stared straight ahead. Satisfied that we were sufficiently uninteresting, and equally unimposing, the officer lowered his hand. That, to Mr. Fish, was a green flag. He hit the accelerator; the motor whined, and the tachometer spun.

“I am sorry for the bumps in the road,” Mr. Fish said. “There is another road I can take, but it is about thirty kilometers longer. It is less bumpy, so maybe it is worth the extra gas?”

I knew about the alternate route, at least, I had seen it on a map. The road, a two-lane highway really, turns away from the river just outside of Luxor, and runs through the desert highland, roughly parallel to the Nile. It avoids all the towns and villages and has fewer checkpoints along the way.

“The road is safe, but it is not for tourists. Police don’t want you to come this way. So if the police stop us, say you are my friend, not my customer. OK?”

A mile or so down the road, Mr. Fish turned the wheel hard, and we left the Nile’s green shoulders behind us. The lush agricultural land that saddles the banks of the river instantly faded to brown, grey, and yellow boulders; it was exactly as Bruce described it in his Travels more than two centuries ago. Dust and sand blew across the road in pretty little wisps, and I half-expected to find a beach over the next hill. Instead, I saw a massive housing development in various stages of construction. A row of pretty, Mediterranean villas, each painted in yellows and reds, and capped with a widow’s walk, lined the road. A high, stone wall, topped with a wrought iron fence, blocked much of my view, but what I could see looked like million-dollar homes surrounded by a golf course in need of a landscaper (their lawns were more sand trap than putting green). Beyond them, steel and concrete pillars rose from the earth; naked rebar poked into the sky. These, I supposed, would be apartment blocks or office buildings one day.

“This is new,” Mr. Fish said. “The government sold the land very cheap and people build houses. Some are foreign. Chinese. But they are vacation houses only. Very little people live there now.”

Mr. Fish slowed the car while I took a few blurry pictures of Italianate mansions set among empty husks of multi-story apartment blocks. I didn’t know it then, but the development is part of a broader national policy to build new cities in the country’s vast, open desert. The idea behind the government project, called New Urban Communities, is to reduce urban crowding, but also to protect agricultural land. The project, in theory, makes a lot of sense. Most of Egypt’s cities crowd the Nile, but the Nile is also the only naturally arable land in the country. Something has to give, and it’s easier to move people than the river, or so you might think. In all, the plan includes twenty-eight new cities, some of which are complete (El Asher City, near Cairo, was the first), though others are stalled in byzantine planning processes or waiting for funding that will never come. The houses and apartment blocks we saw were part of a settlement called New Thebes, or New Tiba, depending on the translation. Founded in 2000, New Thebes is a sister city of Luxor, built on 10,000 or so feddans, about ten miles to the northeast of the historic city for which it is named. When, and if, the city is ever completed it may house 200,000 people, but the government estimates that today it houses about 19,000. Even that may be an overestimate. What we saw was, to be polite, a work in progress. I wondered what Bruce would have thought of New Thebes. I doubt it would have been kind. “New Thebes is no town, but some sand and a few bushes so called,” he might write.

Beyond New Thebes, the highway was a ribbon of fresh, black tar on a bed of coarse earth. There were no lane markings, no guardrails, no lights, no reflectors, no signs, no curbs, and no traffic. The road was laid out for us and us alone, or so it felt. The only sign of life was an odd bit of trash here and there. The security checkpoints would come soon enough, but here we had the highway to ourselves. Mr. Fish stepped on the gas, and yawned. I watched the odometer climb to a steady hundred miles per hour, and for the first time that morning, Mr. Fish looked happy. Tired, but happy.

An hour or so into the trip, we passed a horrific twisted car wreck, exactly like the one we had seen on the bus trip from Cairo to Luxor. In the bright sun, set against the open landscape, we could see the mass of blackened steel from about a mile away. The wreck, by then pushed to the side of the highway, looked like an algebra problem: If two drivers, each traveling at a hundred miles an hour, crash head-on, how many people will survive? The answer was painfully obvious.

“The drivers are crazy,” Mr. Fish said, “they drive too fast, then miss the curve.” The irony was lost on him, as he sped past the wrecked cars at full speed. This, I thought, is why we insisted on traveling during the day, not because the drivers are safer, but because there are fewer of them to meet around each bend.

There were, in fact, so few cars on the road that day, that Mr. Fish took a very wrong turn. Like most Egyptian drivers, Mr. Fish exhibited a liberal attitude toward lanes and right of way. He avoided the shoulders and rode the crown for miles at a stretch. At one point – I didn’t notice where – the eastbound and westbound lanes split, and Mr. Fish veered left into what would have been opposing traffic, if there had been any. Through the passenger window, I watched the eastbound lanes veer off to the right, a hundred feet away, across a median strip of desert gravel. That side of the road, where we desperately belonged, was empty and lonely and so much safer than the westbound lanes in which we then rode. I asked Mr. Fish if he thought we were going the wrong way, but he insisted we were fine. For once, I didn’t share his confidence – I could only think of that twisted wreck a few miles back. Would we be another algebra problem, swept off to the side of the road, left to the vultures and sun? I bit my tongue as we traveled, at full speed, eastbound in the westbound lanes. A few minutes later, the lanes merged, and Mr. Fish drifted back to the right side of the road.

“There are settlements here, in the hills,” Mr. Fish said. He seemed remarkably calm considering that we just drove – for several miles – the wrong way down a highway, but I let him continue. “The energy companies. They have towers here. And the men live in barracks for work.” He pointed to a line of electric transmission towers running across the hilltops.

A few miles down the road, we passed one of the settlements that Mr. Fish had mentioned. A stand of tall, green trees, and a high, stone wall rose along the highway. Behind that sat a two-story stucco building with a few windows. A gravel driveway led to an impenetrable security gate. The settlements and transmission towers are high-risk targets for the militants. So, too, are the oil wells and pipelines in the desert and mountains. The railway that once ran from Qena to Safaga was a frequent target as well. The Eastern Desert can be a dangerous place.

Every few miles, we passed through a security checkpoint, or we may have passed through the same checkpoint many times – I couldn’t tell. The checkpoints all looked the same: a caution sign, speed bumps, tubular steel barriers, and then, on each side of the highway, a two-story, sandstone guard tower. Each tower was manned by a pair of armed soldiers, many of whom yawned and stretched as we passed. I wondered what transgression each of these men had committed for which they were sentenced to guard duty, in the desert, in the day, during Ramadan. It seemed like a serious sentence indeed. When the Romans ruled Egypt, they sent their prisoners here to mine for granite and porphyry. It was, according to Lonely Planet, a hardship post for the soldiers who guarded the prisoners here. Two thousand years later, the prisoners are gone, but the soldiers remain. It’s still a hardship post, but unlike the checkpoints along the river, here the police let us pass unmolested

Somewhere in the middle of the desert, we passed a wide field of leafy, green plants surrounded by a low, stone wall. The maturing plants rose a few feet above the ground, and they were arranged in perfect rows. It was a farm, and it looked perfectly lost. “The government wants to move people out here. They grow cotton, corn, and everything. Money. They put a lake, too.” Mr. Fish pointed past the field, toward a line of silver and blue: a reservoir.

There we were, a hundred miles or so from the nearest body of freshwater, staring at a field of cash crops, surrounded by rocky hills etched with wadi. A few hardy trees and short grasses grow in the hills, I read, but we never saw any. What hope is there for a farm in the desert? I imagine that a thousand years from now, archaeologists will excavate the farm and the reservoir. They’ll find the enclosure wall, and the irrigation system, and the seeds or their husks, and they’ll marvel at the ancient Egyptian technology. (Others will claim that aliens built it.)

Mr. Fish held the wheel steady with one hand and covered his yawns with the other. Several times, he asked if we wanted to stop for a coffee break, though I assumed it was he, not us, who needed to rest. There were no facilities or even shade within sight, so we politely declined.

Teresa skimmed our guidebook and read aloud tidbits she found interesting. “The Romans had quarries and a temple somewhere around here. Keep your eye out for round huts. They belong to the nomadic herders who live here. And there are petroglyphs and old gold mines all over the mountains it says.” Teresa – born and raised on a rainy outcrop in Ireland – adores deserts. To her they are exotic and foreign, and the Eastern Desert may as well have been Mars.

As the highway climbed deeper into the mountains, the black, asphalt highway that we had enjoyed since New Thebes devolved into a raw bed of packed soil. This, I realized, is where Bruce spent five pages describing various shades of feldspar, but all I saw was dust and dirt. Construction equipment lined the shoulders of the highway: bulldozers, spreaders, pavers, flatbed trailers, and bucket trucks sat and waited. The unpaved road twisted and turned as we climbed through the mountains, and Mr. Fish reluctantly lifted his foot from the gas pedal. “This is not good,” he said as the car struggled to climb the pass on the dirt road. Then the valley narrowed around us, and the cracked cliffs hung overhead; large rocks with serrated edges spilled down the hills and rolled across the highway. Mr. Fish leaned forward while his feet worked the pedals. We fell in line behind a row of trucks hauling livestock, fuel, and other cargo. It was the first traffic we had seen since we left Luxor, and it made the climb that much harder and slower.

“Somewhere around here there’s a Roman ruin. It’s a fortress and quarry. There’s supposed to be a signpost on this road, it says. Yeah, about forty kilometers along the Safaga-Qena road. Then it’s another twenty-five kilometers along a track of deteriorated tarmac,” Teresa read out loud. “Mr. Fish, have you ever been there?”

Mr. Fish wanted to scream. While Teresa relaxed in the backseat, Mr. Fish struggled to drive up the mountain pass, behind a dozen overloaded trucks, on a dirt highway strewn with fallen rock. He desperately wanted to pass the trucks, but there was no room, not even for an Egyptian driver. He winced and bit his tongue. “No, it’s no good for you. You need police, and it’s too hot for summer. It will be closed.”

Trapped behind a line of lumbering freight trucks, we climbed deeper into the barren, waterless mountains, and around each corner, a fresh rock fall threatened the tires. I understood why the two-hundred-mile trip takes four hours. The open desert was the easy part, but the mountains – on a highway of raw earth – were barely passable. No wonder Herodotus thought it would take two months to cross the desert! For a dozen miles, we crept up the long, steep slope. The trucks ahead of us kicked up clods of dirt the size of baseballs – they rained over the hood and crashed against the windshield like a terrible storm. The cliffs overhead spilled their marble into the soft shoulders and across the roadbed. Suddenly, it was over. As the highway crested the hill in a narrow canyon, the raw earth disappeared under a strip of beautiful, black asphalt complete with lane dividers, jersey barriers, and a glorious sign on the side of the road:



50 Safaga

110 Hurghada



Mr. Fish released the steering wheel and clapped. The road twisted and turned a few more times, just for good measure, and then, off in the distance, a line of light blue water rose against the horizon – it was the Red Sea.

As the highway spilled out of the mountains, and the sea grew bigger, I realized that our trip across the desert was nearly over. From reading Herodotus and Strabo, I hoped the trip would be exotic, but not dangerous; in the end, it was neither. Unlike Bruce, who traveled this way two and a half centuries earlier, there were no raids on our caravan, no thieves to catch, no riots to quell, and no real threats. The Egyptian government fortified the region decades ago, to protect the oil fields and phosphate mines against militant extremists and foreign invasion (Israeli, in particular). Now the roads are closed to foreigners, not just to protect us from danger, but to protect the mineral wealth and archaeological sites from us.

Mr. Fish asked whether we wanted a coffee break in Safaga, and Teresa consulted our guidebook for advice. While Teresa searched for tourist-friendly cafés, we entered the last police checkpoint on the road to the Red Sea. It looked the same as all the others replete with twin guard towers manned by sleepy guards, but, for the first time since we left Luxor that morning, the police ordered Mr. Fish to stop. An officer leaned over and asked Mr. Fish for his license. They spoke to each other in a hushed tone, and though I couldn’t understand any of it, the message was clear: Mr. Fish was in trouble. He pulled into a small parking lot next to the guardhouse and followed the officer inside. Teresa and I sat in the car and wondered what happened.

A few minutes later, Mr. Fish stepped outside and leaned through the passenger window. “Come inside with me please. I have to pay a fine of one hundred fifty pounds. It is a tourist fee,” he said. Mr. Fish frowned as he spoke; in fact, he looked almost ready to cry, and I felt terrible.

Earlier in our trip, I asked Mr. Fish about the taxi business in Egypt. We talked about the cars (very expensive, even by American standards), the price of gas (subsidized by the government, but just went up), repairs (hard to find trustworthy mechanics), the broken meters (the metered fares aren’t fair at all), and how the fares are split between the owners and the drivers (very unevenly). For our trip to Hurghada, we negotiated a six-hundred-pound fare, which Mr. Fish would split with the owner. Mr. Fish would keep twenty-five per cent, while the owner got the rest. In other words, the tourist fee that Mr. Fish was about to pay was his entire salary for the day. The fine was a harsh punishment for carrying foreigners, without a permit, on a restricted road across the desert.

Inside the guardhouse, the officer sat behind a large metal table littered with piles of official-looking paper. An oscillating fan cooled the room, and the stacks of paper fluttered in the breeze. There were no other chairs, no watercooler, no magazines, and no escape. The officer, an older gentleman with a crisp white uniform and neatly trimmed beard, held Mr. Fish’s license with one hand and scribbled in a carbon-copy notebook with the other. While he wrote, the officer lectured Mr. Fish for several minutes. All the while, Mr. Fish stared straight ahead and stood at full attention with his shoulders tucked back like a schoolboy called in to meet the principal. The officer consulted a set of books filled with rules and regulations (I imagine) while he slowly completed a series of forms. Mr. Fish paid the fine, and the officer returned his license along with a copy of his incident report. Then he admonished Mr. Fish for several more minutes, about what I could only guess. I wanted to speak up, to defend Mr. Fish against the tyranny, like Bruce defended the Turks against the Arabs on their crossing, but Bruce was a wealthy diplomat who carried letters of transit from Cairo. I was a lowly writer, with no letters at all, so I bit my tongue.

About twenty minutes later, as we reached the outskirts of Safaga, Mr. Fish asked again if we wanted a coffee break, and this time we agreed, not because we were tired, but because Mr. Fish obviously needed to rest. We followed a wide road through the heart of town, past block after block of apartment buildings. In the end, Mr. Fish parked in front of a small, white mosque surrounded by a stand of trees. Teresa and I stepped outside and looked around for a few minutes, but Mr. Fish sat in his car and closed his eyes. By then, we were about thirty miles from Hurghada, and though our trip across the desert was nearly over, Mr. Fish had a long ride back to Luxor. So Teresa and I pretended that the scenery was more scenic than it really was, and we let Mr. Fish rest until the heat forced us back inside.

“Do you want to see Safaga? There are restaurants and coffee. I’m sure we can find something open for you. Maybe near the water?”

“No, that’s fine,” I said. “I think we should get to our hotel, before it gets too late.” Normally we never pass on a chance to visit a new city, but our guidebook described Safaga as a “rough-and-ready port town.” The city was founded by the Greeks in the third century BC, when it was known as Philotera. Strabo mentioned the city, very briefly, in Geographica, but there were no ancient ruins or archaeology museums to visit, then, or now. From what we saw along the main road through town, there was nothing much to do. Mr. Fish turned the car around and followed the signs toward Hurghada.

The highway north of Safaga follows a narrow band of sandy gravel between the sea and the mountains. The fresh tar was black and slick with oil. To our left, the Red Sea Mountains, a ridge of colossal and pointed peaks, rose sharply over the highway and cast their cool shade over the asphalt. These, our guidebook told us, are the highest mountains in mainland Egypt, the highest of which, Gebel Shayeb El-Banat, reaches 7,175 feet into the sky. To our right, the Red Sea stretched east to the horizon, where it met the coast of Saudi Arabia, a hundred miles away. The water, salty and hot and absolutely still, was a cartoonish soft blue, an unnatural shade you can only find in the biggest box of crayons. Teresa and I admired the scenery out loud, while Mr. Fish drove as fast as he could toward Hurghada.

We passed a string of construction sites along the beachfront. Some were mere foundations of concrete and brick, others were empty husks of steel. Real estate developers and financiers call this stretch of road the Red Sea Riviera – a mixed blessing if ever there were one. Like New Thebes and other mega projects around Egypt, construction along the coast here has stalled, in some cases, for years. There are a few exceptions to the rule. Just south of Hurghada, we passed a massive shopping mall surrounded by an equally massive parking lot. The Senzo Mall, its website says, covers forty or so feddans of prime real estate. The mall, which opened in 2009 (when times were good), houses about one hundred forty retail stores, fast food restaurants, and something called Kidzo that bills itself as the largest indoor children’s park in the Red Sea area. (I’m not sure how many indoor children’s parks there are in the area, so I’m not sure if this claim is exciting.)

As we passed the mall, the road split around a huge traffic circle, and Mr. Fish looked nervous. “Which hotel do you stay?” he asked.

“The Steigenberger Al Dau Beach Hotel,” I replied. I then realized that neither Mr. Fish nor I had any idea how to find the hotel. “It’s on the beach,” I said, hopelessly stating the obvious.

“Don’t worry, I’ll find it,” Mr. Fish said. Unlike most men, Mr. Fish wasn’t afraid to ask directions. He pressed on the accelerator and sped north till he caught up with another taxi. He rolled down his window, and motioned for the driver’s attention. The two drivers shouted back and forth through their open windows, but they were driving too fast to understand each other. I heard Mr. Fish yell something about Steigenberger, but the other driver just shrugged and shouted some more. A moment later, Mr. Fish and the other driver slowed to a stop – in the middle of the highway. Traffic flew by at full speed while Mr. Fish and the taxi driver chatted. Cars honked. Buses honked. Trucks honked. Teresa cried. I yelled. Nothing worked. So we watched and listened as the other taxi driver waved his hands and pointed in the air like a mad magician. I don’t know what he said, but it seemed to make sense to Mr. Fish. The other taxi driver honked his horn and sped away. “We just missed the turn. I have to go around,” Mr. Fish said.

Over the next ten minutes, Mr. Fish violated a dozen driving laws (he didn’t mind driving down the highway shoulder against oncoming traffic), but eventually we found our way to the Steigenberger. For some reason – I don’t know why – the security guards at the front gate seemed very surprised to see us, but eventually Mr. Fish convinced them to open the gates for us. I waved my hand and said “Open sesame,” but nobody laughed. Mr. Fish parked under the porte cochère and jumped out of the car to open our doors. I looked at my phone to check the time; it was nearly three o’clock. Even with our unplanned stop at the security checkpoint, and our break at Safaga, and a few other delays, we were only a few minutes late.

The three of us stood in the shade for a few minutes and stretched our legs. Teresa marveled at the hotel’s grandiosity – its soft, beige sandstone façade reminded her of the Bellagio in Las Vegas, she said. Mr. Fish inspected the car and wiped dust from the hood, but really, he was politely waiting for me. He looked up at me a few times while I counted off a stack of cash to pay our fare, plus a tip, plus his fine.

“This is for you, Mr. Fish,” I said. “Thank you for driving us here. I know it was very hard for you. And I’m sorry the police stopped you. I hope it won’t be a problem.” I held the thick wad of cash in my palm and slipped it to Mr. Fish when we shook hands.

“Of course, my friend. It is the cost of doing business in Egypt.”



⁂



Hurghada was born in the nineteenth century, on a dusty cape known for little more than the tall, green bushes (el ghadarq) that grow there. A small archipelago sits just offshore and those islands provided safe harbor for Arabian sailors who fished the Red Sea, but there were no permanent settlers here till relatively recently. The name Hurghada first appeared in the 1880s, in a slim field report published by LH Mitchell, an American geologist and engineer who explored the coast and mountains for several months. To him, “Abou Hurghada” was little more than an incidental landmark, a “principal headland of the Coast plain.” The details are sketchy, and no one seems willing to cite any sources, but one tourism website reports that, by 1908, there was a trading post at Hurghada, and it had “six simple huts, which were built with camel wool and camel hair.” Near the huts, Arabian sailors dried fish that they later sold “to the Egyptians, who came with camel caravans from Upper Egypt.” The Anglo-Egyptian Oilfields Ltd, working with Mitchell’s field report, discovered an oil field near the cape in 1913. The field was famous for its output, and, during the First World War, it was also a prime target for attack. Egypt established a small military outpost to defend the oil fields, but even then, the regional population measured only a few dozen traders, roughnecks, and soldiers.

In 1928, Egypt established a marine biological station a few miles north of the trading post and oil fields, and the facility, Mohatta el ahyaa el baharya, officially opened around 1930. Eugenie Clark, an American ichthyologist, studied here for about a year, beginning in 1950. By then the station included an “office building, library, museum, engine house, and cottages,” but even though the facility was large enough for a dozen scientists, Clark wrote, in her autobiographical Lady with a Spear, that she usually had the place to herself. And though Clark estimated that hundreds of people worked at Hurghada Field at the time, oil production had already peaked, and the pumps drew more seawater than oil by then. Clarke wrote that Hurghada was “changing to a ghost town,” and she speculated that when the oil fields gave out, the town, which had very little potable water and relied almost entirely on imported water delivered by British tankers to supply the oil workers, would simply collapse.

Two forces forestalled the collapse of Hurghada: recreational diving and war. Hans Hass, an Austrian zoologist, visited the area and produced an award-winning documentary film, Under the Red Sea, which publicized the natural beauty he found there. A few years later, Jacques Cousteau, recently retired from the French navy and by then a successful documentarian and explorer, visited the Red Sea and produced The Silent World, which added to the mystique created by Hass’ film. A handful of adventure tourists traveled to the coast where they found pristine waters and unexplored dive spots. Around the same time, Gamal Abdel Nasser, a hero of the 1952 revolution and second president of Egypt, nationalized the Suez Canal and prohibited Israeli ships from passing through it. A few months later, Israel invaded the Sinai Peninsula, and the United Kingdom and France seized control of the Canal Zone. The ensuing wars and battles lasted for more than two decades, during which time Egypt fortified its eastern seaboard, including Hurghada, against invasion. Meanwhile, Egypt realigned its economy and military around its new allies in the Eastern Bloc, including the Soviet Union and Germany. In 1965, Peter and Helga Kopp, a German couple, opened the first recreational and sport diving facility in Egypt, at Hurghada. Hurghada was then still a small town with only a few hundred hotel rooms and a few scruffy cafes, and it catered mostly to Russian and German tourists. In 1979, Anwar Sadat and Menachem Begin signed the Camp David Accords. The agreement ended the Arab-Israeli wars. The seaboard, which had been heavily fortified for decades, was suddenly open to foreign tourists and to foreign investors. Recreational dive boats replaced the fishing vessels, tourists replaced the roughnecks, and hotels, like the Steignberger Al Dau, replaced the rusted oil derricks. Which brings us back to those few short days when Teresa and I shared a luxurious suite overlooking the sea.

We had never heard of the place before we got to Egypt, but then the name was everywhere. It’s a resort town on the Red Sea Riviera, we were told, and that’s true, but we had also never heard of the Red Sea Riviera. To us, Hurghada was a consolation prize; the place we went when the Western Desert refused to have us. In the desert, we would have slept under the stars, surrounded by camels and campfires, or so we imagined. When that dream evaporated, we set our eyes east, to the sea. Teresa liked the idea of snorkeling in the crystal clear water, and I liked the idea of indoor plumbing (something we might not have found in the Western Desert). On our drive across the desert, I asked Mr. Fish what he knew of Hurghada. He had been to Hurghada a few times, he told us, but just as a driver. “Hurghada is for tourists,” he said, “not for taxi drivers.” Mr. Fish was sure that we would have a good time; he just couldn’t say how or where. Inshallah? I asked. Inshallah, Mr. Fish answered with a smile.

By one estimate, there are now about 40,000 hotel rooms in Hurghada. Ours was a luxurious junior suite in a resort that easily deserved each of its five stars. As always, we were greeted with two glasses of fresh karkadé, which we swallowed in hasty gulps. We followed a bellman up an elevator and through a long, winding hallway to our room where we found a palatial, albeit junior, suite outfitted with marble floors, high-definition television, lounge chairs, writing desk, and a king-sized bed dressed in fine linens. Teresa brewed a cup of tea and met me outside, on our private balcony, where we enjoyed the scenery. Our balcony overlooked several acres of landscaped gardens and walking paths. Shade trees, palms, beach umbrellas, and waterfront bars lined a sprawling swimming pool. In the distance, past the elegant, open-air restaurants, and beyond the artificial beach of imported sand, the Red Sea shimmered like a sheet of turquoise under the blazing sun. Teresa sipped her tea and scribbled in her journal, while I looked to the sea and wondered how far it was to Saudi Arabia.

Teresa looked up from her journal. “How many nights are we here?”

“Three. Why?”

“It’s beautiful. We should stay longer,” she said.

“Do you think you want to go diving or snorkeling? I don’t think there’s much else to do here,” I said. “We could check out the town.”

Teresa took another sip of tea and stared into the horizon. “We should stay longer,” she repeated.

I called downstairs and spoke with a clerk at the front desk for a few minutes. “They said they’re booked out. It’s Ramadan. I guess we were lucky to get here when we did,” I said. “Are you ready to go for a walk?”

“In a minute, I’m enjoying my view!”

While Teresa nursed her drink, I skimmed our guidebook and read about Hurghada. I learned that the city is divided, in some fashion, into three areas: Al Dahar (the Old Town), Sigalla (the New Town), and a resort strip that I nicknamed the New New Town. At Al Dahar we would find the souq, charming restaurants, and the cheapest hotel rooms in Hurghada; none of which we needed right then. Sigalla, our guidebook said, is convenient, but “extremely congested and noisy;” also nothing we needed to see, at least not yet. Then there is that nameless resort strip, which other sources call Al Kawther, and for which Lonely Planet had few kind words. To them, our hotel, which didn’t even earn an honorable mention in the guidebook, was one of many “upmarket resorts” surrounded by “Western-style shopping malls and half-finished shells of hotels.” They were right, of course, but, from the comfort of our balcony by the sea, that resort strip was very pleasant indeed.

Like many resorts and hotels in Egypt, the Steigenberger Al Dau is surrounded by a high wall and protected by a secured gate, so, when we finally went for our walk, it took a few moments to find the exit. On the other side of that barrier, we took our first steps on terra firma, which, I would admit, was thoroughly uninteresting. I wondered whether we should hire a taxi and run straight to Al Dahar for a taste of Old Hurghada, to find a scruffy café or a quiet bookstore where we might enjoy the rest of our day.

“We just got here. We should look around here before we run off to the next place. Why are you in such a hurry to leave?” Teresa asked.

I shrugged my shoulders and pouted.

“Which way should we go?” Teresa asked.

“I don’t know. Our hotel’s not on the map, but I think everything worth seeing is that way.” I pointed north and hoped for the best.

A block away, several men lay on the grass of a quiet traffic circle, in the shade of a few green trees. There was no traffic whatsoever, and the circle proved a very comfortable rest stop for the men. One of them, we couldn’t tell whom, lazily called out tax, but they were too hot, too tired, too hungry, and too thirsty to give us any more attention. They let us pass without another word.

We followed a quiet promenade, Al Memsha, for a mile or so. The promenade, paved in decorative crescent blocks, was lined with dozens of shops and stalls, their shelves and windows filled with kitschy souvenirs, hats, sunglasses, bathing suits, and T-shirts like those you would find in Myrtle Beach. A few of the shops offered plastic ankhs, statues of Osiris, and porcelain dinner plates adorned with the golden mask of Tutankhamen. Yet a few more sold local favorites like shisha pipes and fanous. These were the Western-style strip malls mentioned, with snobby derision, in our guidebook, but they were more interesting than we expected, for exactly one reason: the language. In Hurghada, where about 30,000 Russian expats reside full-time (some of them legally), the signs and banners and sandwich boards greeted us in Cyrillic lettering. In Hurghada, Russian, not English or Arabic, is the lingua franca of commerce. (The prices, however, were listed in euro and pound, with no mention, anywhere, of the lowly ruble.)

The promenade stretched into the horizon. We passed hotels, resorts, strip malls, empty tour buses, fast food restaurants, idled taxis, and a nightclub or two, but the street was quiet and pleasant, and the towering palm trees cast just enough shade to keep us cool. Merchants, middle-aged men in silk polo shirts, shouted to us from the comfort of their stools; some held up scarves and hats and souvenir picture books. We smiled and waved, and called out “Nyet, spasibo! No, thank you.” A few touts followed us for a minute or two. They delivered their sales pitches in thick Russian. “Nyet, spasibo,” I said with a wave. Around one corner, we found a Hard Rock Café, a pink Cadillac mounted on its terrace, homage, I presumed, to Bruce Springsteen and the (awful) song of the same name. “This,” I said, “looks more like Aruba than Egypt,” and Teresa agreed. I took a few photos, for no particular reason, and we moved along. A few minutes later, we paused in the shade by the Grand Resort, a massive hotel and retail complex that straddles the street, with rooms that overlook the sea and the promenade. We had seen enough resorts for the day; it was time to enjoy our own.

Teresa wanted to walk back along the waterfront. She hoped we could walk along the beach all the way back to our hotel, but most of the beaches are privately owned. The resorts would charge a fee for us to use them, and some might turn us away altogether. (Terrorists targeted at least two waterfront resorts in recent years, and in one attack, the killer swam from a public beach to a hotel where he stabbed several foreigners.) Instead, we followed the promenade, but, being in no hurry whatsoever, we dawdled and peeked and poked in all the storefronts we found on the way. We stopped at restaurants to read the menus, we stopped at real estate agencies to inspect the apartments for let, and we stopped at pharmacies to ask about antacids and mouthwash. Teresa admired the scarves on display at one shop, and I tried on a pair of plastic sandals at another. We listened, carefully, to a tout who tried, very politely, to sell something to us, what, we don’t know, because his Russian was far better than mine. When I replied to him in English, he laughed and walked away. At one corner, I noticed two camels parked on the promenade, their reins tied to a phone booth. They looked bored.

A few blocks from our hotel, we passed a travel agency and stopped to look in the window. The black-and-white, photocopied flyers posted on the glass advertised day trips to Cairo, Luxor, and the Suez Canal. Others advertised boat tours and dive trips and parasailing adventures around the islands. A few other flyers listed unbelievable, discount prices for five-star resorts around Sharm El-Sheikh. It all sounded wonderful, but, again, it was nothing we wanted. If anything, we needed to find a way to Alexandria, but even that could wait.

“Guten Tag. Kann ich Ihnen helfen, etwas zu finden?” The travel agent, a young Egyptian man with a high voice and pleasant smile, sat on a small stool outside, in the shade. We hadn’t noticed him when we walked up to the window, and his voice startled us. “Kann ich Ihnen helfen, Ihren Urlaub zu planen?”

“He wants to know if we need help planning a trip. I think.” Teresa, who spent a summer in Germany years ago, did her best to translate for me.

“Oh, English, yes? Not German? Sie sprechen kein Deutsch? Sorry, I thought you were German, I don’t know why. There are many Germans here! Russians, too!” The travel agent, whose name we forgot to ask, spoke slowly and picked his words with caution. Clearly, he was more comfortable sprechen Deutsch than English, and for the next few minutes, and for the first time on our trip across Egypt, Teresa took control. I stood to the side and listened.

“We just arrived in Hurghada. It’s beautiful, but we are only here for a few days.”

“Yes, of course. Now you want to see Luxor?”

“No, we just came from Luxor,” Teresa said.

“Oh, so you want to see Sharm El-Sheikh next?”

“No, it’s too dangerous.”

“Well, yes, but no more dangerous than anywhere else!”

“We want to go to Alexandria next. But we don’t want to fly.”

The travel agent frowned and rubbed his hands together. “From Hurghada, to Alexandria, you must first go to Cairo. There are no boats, no trains, no cars, no luxury. You should fly.”

“Do you have tours of Cairo? Maybe we can take a tour bus to Cairo, but just get out in Cairo, and not come back to Hurghada?”

“No, sorry. If you go, you must come back, or the bus company will have trouble.”

“Do you know about Go Bus? It’s supposed to be nice. We took another bus from Cairo to Luxor, and it was... it was….” Teresa didn’t enjoy the experience, but she didn’t want to hurt any feelings either.

“Yes, the bus can be… very… difficult.” The agent paused and chose his words very carefully, wary of hurting our feelings. “Especially… especially this time of year. I am sorry, but I can not help you today.”

The agent led us back to the promenade where we all shook hands and wished each other the best of luck. I called out “Auf Wiedersehen” as we walked away, and he waved and laughed. Teresa and I hadn’t planned to visit a travel agency that day; in fact, we hadn’t thought about how we would get to Alexandria or Cairo at all. We knew that, sometime over the next few days, we would have to figure it out, but we didn’t want to spend all of our time in Hurghada finding a way to leave Hurghada. I suggested we ignore the problem for the rest of the day and enjoy our resort. Teresa agreed.

We found a small grocery store on a quiet corner a few blocks from our hotel. The lights were off, but the doors were wide open. The narrow aisles were loaded with cakes and cookies and jams and candies and pickled hams and pickled beets and pickled fish. Toward the back of the store, we found a produce section with boxes and crates and cartons filled with melons and berries and grapes and figs and potatoes and carrots. Refrigeration units on the far wall held warm milk and soft butter and hard cheese and bottled juice and rows of Coca Cola and Fanta. We realized that we hadn’t eaten all day, and, though our hotel reservation included dinner (half-board, they called it), we couldn’t wait. Teresa grabbed a few apples and a bag of nuts. I picked up chocolate bars and chips and cans of soda. Then we joined the mob near the registers. The line, if there were one, snaked and squirreled around the aisles and doubled-back against itself till no one, least of all us, knew where it started or ended. The cashiers, two young, pleasant women, scanned groceries and punched at their registers with great fury. Suddenly, it was our turn to pay, but, of course, the cashier didn’t have exact change. Instead, she handed a stack of bills to me, and, rather than the few coins I expected, she reached into a tin can next to the register and gave me a few pieces of chewing gum. It was the most elegant solution to the problem we ever encountered.

On our way to dinner that evening, we toured the hotel grounds. A sign by one of the pools listed the air temperature (38), the sea temperature (31), and the pool temperature (28), each of which is very warm. Another sign pointed the way to the various amenities, to the restaurants, and to the beach. Teresa said she had waited long enough; it was time to dip our toes in the sea. We followed a winding trail among the pools, around the cabanas, between the trees, and over a bridge or two. Somewhere we got lost, doubled-back, passed a golf course, waved at the groundskeeper, and took pictures of the full moon hanging over us. Eventually, we found a long boardwalk and heard water lapping at the shore. We had found the Red Sea. The beach, a long, narrow strip of sand, was dark, quiet, and perfectly empty. The sea, a warm, thick slurry of saltwater, brushed the beach with gentle, careful strokes. A streetlamp from the boardwalk cast our shadow over the water, and for the first time in weeks, we held hands in public.

Teresa kicked off a sandal and dipped her toe in the water. “Don’t you want to put your toes in the water, too?” she asked.

“Good idea,” I said. My shoes, by then, were caked in dust and sand. I stuck my toes in the sea and rinsed my footwear.

“That’s not what I meant!” Teresa laid her head against my chest and we watched the sea brush against the beach for quite awhile.

“What do you want to do tomorrow?” I asked.

“I suppose we have to find a bus to Alexandria.”

“I think we’ll have to stop in Cairo for a day or two on the way. You heard the travel agent; there are no direct buses to Alexandria.”

“Right, and I don’t want to spend the night at some bus station in Cairo!”

“We’ll stop at the concierge desk first thing in the morning…”

“After breakfast! And I want to sleep late, if we can.”

“OK, so we’ll get up late, go to breakfast…”

“Then I want to go for a swim. I want to try the lazy river, and maybe try snorkeling in the sea.”

That evening, we ate dinner at one of the hotel restaurants, near the water. We sat outside, on a patio, where a warm breeze blew fresh air in our faces. A woman sat on a stool in the shade and played a flute. The music drifted across the patio and out to sea. I don’t remember exactly what we ate; it was a fixed menu of salads and meats and cakes. Everything was trimmed and tied and painted in whimsical shapes and colors; it tasted even better than it looked. Teresa ordered a beer, some local brew that I didn’t expect to find there. She said it was good, and I believed her.

That night, while Teresa slept, I huddled over my computer. I searched, in vain, for direct bus routes – and flights – to Alexandria. The travel agent was korrekt: all trips would pass through Cairo, and there were no good connections. I had hoped to find a secret route to Alexandria, one that would be easy to book, so we could enjoy our time in Hurghada. No such luck. I tried to sleep, but my mind wasn’t ready. Instead, I scanned the Internet for information about Hurghada. I wondered what, if anything, we would find in town the next day. I wondered about the history, but most sources fell back on a time-tested cliché: Hurghada was once a sleepy fishing village… or something like that. I scoured a handful of databases, downloaded old pilots (annotated naval surveys), learned about the Egyptian oil industry (dates back to antiquity), studied the Arab-Israeli Wars (there would be no winners), and discovered that the term “Red Sea Riviera” isn’t just a snobby epithet, it’s an official moniker, trademarked, in several countries, by the Egyptian Ministry of Tourism. By the time I closed my computer, I felt like an authority on all things Hurghada.

I looked up, toward the window, sometime around five o’clock. The horizon turned soft pink, and I realized that it was almost morning. I had spent my first night in Hurghada reading about Hurghada. Teresa never noticed; instead, she draped herself across the bed and snored gently. We had crossed Egypt for the last three weeks, and she was exhausted. This was the first time that she slept through the night on that trip, and I don’t think she missed me at all. When I finally crawled into bed, she asked me what time it was. “Bed time,” I said. Teresa rolled over and fell back asleep.



⁂



The next afternoon, we waited for the shuttle bus under the same porte cochère where Mr. Fish had left us the day before. The driver, a brusque Egyptian man with black and grey hair, stood next to the shuttle bus, a cigarette in one hand, an envelope in the other.

“Shuttle bus, yes? Five minutes!”

We were on our way to Sigalla, Hurghada’s “New Town,” about ten miles away, where we hoped to find the local Go Bus office. Earlier that afternoon, after our buffet breakfast and a leisurely swim in the hotel’s lazy river, Teresa and I visited the hotel’s concierge where we asked whether she could arrange a bus tour or private car to Alexandria. It would be impossible, the concierge explained to us, it is simply not done. Not now, not ever, not during Ramadan, but we could fly, she told us. She offered to check for flights (we declined), then suggested we visit a travel agency on the promenade (we already had), then she checked a thick, three-ring binder filled with colorful flyers, but she had no information for buses to Alexandria, Cairo, or anywhere else. Most of her clients flew directly to Hurghada from Moscow or St. Petersburg or Berlin on chartered flights, she explained. From the airport, they were chauffeured to the hotel on air-conditioned motor coaches with dozens of other tourists. Some enjoyed day trips to Luxor or Cairo, but few, if any, traveled to Alexandria, and when they did, which was never, it was by another chartered flight arranged by a tour operator in Europe. She suggested we call the Go Bus agency, in Sigalla, and ask directly.

The Go Bus website listed two offices in Hurghada, but the company refused to commit to any firm address for either location. The Sigalla office, it said, was “in front of the Aka building” near “Sikalla Circle.” The other office, the website reported, was on “El Nasr Road next to metro market in El Dahar area.” I scanned the maps in our guidebook, but neither one mentioned any of the cryptic landmarks from the Go Bus website. I browsed the Internet for clues, but even Google, the almighty search engine, seemed lost. We asked the concierge for directions to the ticket office. She agreed that the office was in Sigalla, and suggested we take the shuttle bus, that afternoon, to Aqua Fun. “It’s very near there,” she said, but, like the Go Bus website, she was unable to offer a more particular location.

Five minutes later, just as promised, the shuttle bus driver climbed into his seat, turned on the radio, fumbled for the right gear, and stomped on the gas pedal with all his weight. The bus, a late-model Yutong motor coach, manufactured in China, had room for a dozen people, but as we left the Steigenberger Al Dau, Teresa and I were its only passengers. We sat in the front row, directly behind the driver, where we hoped to find a view of the city.

“Excuse me, how far is it to Hurghada?” Teresa asked.

“Hurghada? No! Sigalla,” the driver answered.

It was my turn to chime in. “Yes, Sigalla. Where in Sigalla do you set down?” I had our guidebook open to the tiny map of Sigalla and hoped the driver would mention a landmark I could recognize.

“One stop. Sigalla.”

“Shokrun.”

The driver turned down the narrow road in front of the hotel, and we rode past some of those unfinished resort hotels and commercial buildings that we saw the day before. The tarmac disappeared without warning and the bus dropped a foot or so to the bare earth. Thump! I braced myself against the ceiling, and Teresa bounced in the air. Hurghada is still growing; everything is under construction, including the roads. Even without the benefit of a pavement, the driver pushed the pedal to the floor, and within a few seconds, we were surrounded by a thick plume of yellow dust. The driver turned on the windshield wipers with one hand while he turned the steering wheel with the other. For the next few minutes, the bus twisted and turned through a series of traffic circles and side roads till I was thoroughly lost. The driver slammed on the brakes and announced, “One stop. You wait.” He jumped off the bus and raced toward a nearby building.

“Where do you think we are?” Teresa asked.

“I don’t know, I got lost as soon as we left the hotel. I can’t see anything through the window, can you?” I stared through the dust-caked windshield and tried to read the sign on the building. “Oh, no!”

“What?”

“It says Steigenberger Aqua Magic! This is the resort right across the street from our hotel,” I said.

The sister resorts, we quickly realized, shared the shuttle bus, and the long, bumpy ride was just the beginning. Our private ride to Sigalla was about to get busy. A dozen men, women, and children climbed aboard and pushed us out of the way. The children shrieked, the adults hollered, someone spilled a drink, and everyone yelled again. The driver turned up his music and drove as fast as he could.

The bus merged onto a wide highway and drove past the city’s airport. It, too, was under construction, so it didn’t look like much. I later learned that Hurghada International Airport, the second busiest airport in the country, after Cairo’s, handles about thirteen million passengers a year. Most, nearly all, of those passengers are here for one reason: to visit the Red Sea Riviera. The country’s tourism experiment, born in the aftermath of the Arab-Israeli Wars, was an unqualified success. After the airport, the driver turned down a narrow side street and squeezed between parallel lanes of parked taxis. We lost sight of the sea as blocks of concrete towers rose above us. This must be Sigalla, I thought, and it was extremely congested and noisy, just as promised. The driver pulled to the side of the road and double-parked next to another bus.

“Sigalla! Aqua Fun! You! Here! Seven o’clock,” the driver yelled before he disappeared into the crowded lobby of the hotel. Teresa and I jumped out of the shuttle bus first, followed, too closely, by a dozen sweaty, pushy, shovey passengers who couldn’t wait, not for one second, to squeeze through the doors at Aqua Fun. We stood out of the way and watched the horde invade its new target.

“Remember that woman in Luxor, the one who warned us about the Russians?” I asked Teresa.

“Yeah, that was them, huh?”

“I guess she wasn’t kidding!”

Aqua Fun, a mid-range resort hotel in the heart of Sigalla, overlooks the Red Sea, on one side, and a busy commercial strip on the other. We scanned the strip malls and storefronts around Aqua Fun, but if the Go Bus office were nearby, we couldn’t see it. Instead, we saw dozens of cafes, restaurants, and shops with fun names like Seagull Mall, Women Secret, and Maison Du Coton Karkoucha, and several resorts, hotels and condos.

“Let’s go for a walk,” I said. “If we don’t find the office within a few minutes we’ll ask someone.”

In Sigalla, the main road, which has two names, Al Fondok and Sheraton, follows the shoreline north and south for several miles. The newer, more expensive hotels and nightclubs line the beachfront, while the budget hotels and souvenir shops abut the city. We crossed the street and scanned the storefronts as we walked.

“Ledergürtel! Ledergürtel!” A young Egyptian man, neatly dressed in brown slacks and a black polo shirt, followed us for a few minutes. Over his shoulder, he carried a hundred or so leather belts in all sizes, colors, and designs. “Ledergürtel! Euro? Pounds? Ledergürtel! Sie wissen, wie viel?”

“Nein, danke … la, shokrun,” Teresa said.

The vendor turned and walked away. “Ledergürtel! Sie wissen, wie viel?” he called out as he strolled the boulevard.

For the next few blocks, we passed dozens of duty-free shops, street vendors (many of whom also sold ledergürtel!), and empty taxis. Except for two blonde-haired, pink-skinned tourists dressed in shorts, sandals, sunhats, and dark sunglasses, we were the only foreigners on the street that afternoon. Everyone else seemed to be inside the resort hotels and nightclubs where they splashed in saltwater pools and sipped frozen cocktails under palm fronds and beach umbrellas. On one corner, we passed a group of young children, eight or ten years old I guessed. They saw us from a mile away. Euro! Euro! They held out their tiny hands and smiled big, toothy grins. I reached into my pocket and found the sticks of gum that I got as change the day before. One child, a pretty girl with long black hair, grabbed the gum with one hand and held out the other. She smiled and laughed, then shouted again, Euro! Euro! The children followed us for a full block, but lost interest at the first corner. I wondered, with a bit of cynicism, whether the intersection marked their territory, or were they just afraid to cross the street.

“There it is!” Teresa tapped my elbow and pointed toward a wood and aluminum shed emblazoned with the orange and white Go Bus logo on its side. The ticket agent, a thin, young fellow, stood in front of the shed, where the raised awning cast a thin stretch of shade.

“Hello,” I said. “May I speak English?”

“You can try,” the agent said, and we all laughed. “How can I help you?”

“Sorry. So many people here speak Russian and German. I wasn’t sure. We need two tickets, on the nine o’clock bus to Cairo, on Thursday.”

“For Cairo? Yes, I have the schedules here.” The agent pointed at two sheets of paper taped to a counter next to a cash register. Each sheet listed times and prices and cities and days, in Arabic. “But I’m sorry. I cannot sell tickets. The system is down.”

“No!” I cried. “We need to buy tickets today.”

“It is not possible now. If you come back at seven o’clock, maybe then it will work.”

“Our shuttle bus leaves at seven o’clock. Is there another office we can try?”

“Yes, of course, the bus station in Al Dahar. They are open, and there you can buy tickets.”

“Do you know how far it is?”

I held out my guidebook, the page bookmarked to the maps of Sigalla and Al Dahar. The ticket agent stared at the maps, flipped through the pages, and returned the book to me.

“Sorry, I don’t see it on your map. You could walk, but you should take a taxi. It is not far, but you will get lost. In a taxi, five minutes, if you walk, maybe fifteen minutes.”

“Please, we’d like to try walking. Which way is it?” I asked.

The agent frowned and rubbed his chin while he thought.

“Walk straight...” His voice trailed off for a moment. “Walk straight. Take a left at the hospital. When you get lost, find a taxi. It is not far.”

About twenty minutes later, long after we expected to turn left at the hospital, long after we hoped to find the Go Bus office, and long after the tourist shops and cafes gave way to empty lots and faceless apartment blocks, we reached a traffic circle surrounded by wide, unnamed roads leading in half a dozen directions. For the first time that day, and for the first time in Hurghada, we were surrounded by traffic. Taxis honked and slowed, trucks honked and accelerated, cars honked and weaved around the taxis and trucks. We raced across the street and landed safely on the traffic circle. Teresa scowled at me. We should have taken a taxi.

“This is good,” I said. “See that mosque over there? It’s huge. I bet that’s on our map. Let me look for a minute.”

The Al Mina Mosque, fronted by a pair of towering minarets, and capped with a dozen or so massive domes, is the newest and largest mosque in Hurghada. Its entrance overlooks Midan Shedwan, the traffic circle where Teresa and I then stood. The circle, and an elaborate monument thereon, celebrates an indecisive battle fought between Israel and Egypt, in 1970, during the War of Attrition, one of the several Arab-Israeli Wars that I studied the night before. During the battle, Israeli forces attacked Shedwan Island, a few miles off the coast of Hurghada, and captured a few dozen Egyptian soldiers. Depending on whom you believe, Israel scored a fantastic victory (they destroyed a military radar facility), or a terrific loss (Israel evacuated the island within a few hours). In any case, our map showed Midan Shedwan, but not the mosque, and because we were standing on Midan Shedwan, but didn’t know it, we had no idea where we were.

“No, sorry, the mosque isn’t on the map. But let’s look around the corner, just another block or two.”

Teresa wasn’t listening to me. While I poked through our guidebook and flipped between the maps, she went to admire the war monument. She wasn’t alone very long. “La, shokrun. La, la,” she shouted. An aggressive street vendor hovered over her. He wore a satchel over his shoulder and held out stacks of papyrus decorated with gaudy, golden images of pharaohs and pyramids and camels. I charged toward them. “She said, no, thank you.” The vendor tried his sales pitch again. I was twice his size and spitting mad, but he wasn’t afraid of me at all. “La, shokrun,” I shouted. “La, la!”

Teresa was very upset. She loved her luxury suite overlooking the Red Sea, she loved the lazy river and the acres of swimming pools, and she loved the glasses of karkadé we enjoyed at our hotel. Our impromptu walking tour of Sigalla, which, till then, I had very much enjoyed, took her away from all that.

“Let’s get a taxi,” she said. “I’m all done walking for the day, and I don’t want to miss the shuttle bus.”

“Let’s go another block or two,” I said. “If we don’t find the Go Bus office or the hospital by then we’ll just take a taxi.”

We crossed the street – carefully – and turned the corner. A few blocks later, we found a sign, in English and Arabic, posted on the side of the road. It simply read Bus Station. Teresa feigned a weak smile. “I hope that’s it,” she said. It wasn’t. We followed the road for another mile or so, but never found the bus station or any more signs for the bus. Instead, we found a few more resorts, and an occasional glimpse of the Red Sea, but soon the empty lots of sand and gravel outnumbered the cafes and storefronts and taxis. We were running out of town, and Teresa was livid. Hurghada, from the comfort of an air-conditioned suite, with a glass of cold juice in one hand and a good book in the other, is quite pleasant. Hurghada on the edge of the desert, surrounded by humid, salt air, is quite miserable.

“Look, it’s the hospital. I guess we should turn here,” I said. In fact, it was a different hospital altogether.

“Yeah, but that was an hour ago. He said it would be fifteen minutes. We’re lost, aren’t we?”

The hospital was on our right, across the street, overlooking the Red Sea. To our left, a long empty road ran west toward the horizon. It might have been the right street (in fact, it was), but to us, having never been to Hurghada, it looked like the road to nowhere.

“You’re right. Let’s find a hotel and ask there. I don’t want to get lost on some hill in the middle of nowhere,” I said.

In Egypt, whenever we needed help, or a blast of cold air, or a clean bathroom, we turned to the nearest hotel, and, with one single exception, we were met with open arms. In Sigalla, at the Sunny Days Palma de Mirette, on a dusty road miles from anywhere, we were stopped at the door by two hard-nosed security guards. One held out his hand and stood between us and the lobby. He demanded, in Russian, to know our business, and asked for our room number.

“Excuse me, sorry, I am American, my Russian is not very good,” I said, in Russian. “We need to know where the bus station is.” My accent landed somewhere between Yakov Smirnoff and Boris Badenov. I wondered whether the burly guards understood or cared what I said. They did. “He asked us to wait a minute, while he finds someone to help us,” I told Teresa.

A young man, dressed in a dark suit and holding a walkie-talkie, met us at the door. “English? You are lost? Where do you stay?”

“Hello. We are looking for the bus station. For Go Bus. Do you know it?” The Go Bus station, on Al Nasser Street, in Al Dahar, is about two miles from Aqua Fun, where our shuttle bus dropped us a few hours earlier. On our walk, we missed the turn for Al Nasser, not once, but twice. By the time we stopped at the Sunny Days Palma de Mirette we were about a mile away from the station, but even then, we never would have found it without a map. We should have turned left, before the mosque. We should have turned left at the mosque. We should have turned left, up one of those dusty side streets, by the hospital, but we couldn’t read the signs, and there was no one to ask. It was the first, perhaps only, time in Egypt, when we felt truly lost.

“Yes, of course. If you stay on this way, you are lost. No help for you. Go back the way you come, look to Happy House. Go up street. Nasser Street.” He held out his hand and pointed left, up, down, and around again. “You could take a taxi,” he said. “Ten pounds.”

We were so close that I could taste the bus station (a terrible thought). I begged Teresa to try, one more time, to walk there. She reluctantly agreed. We followed the guard’s directions, up a steep hill, past rows of unfinished apartment blocks, and down a wide boulevard. The Go Bus station was there, just as promised. The station was modern and clean and almost comfortable. There were rows and rows of hard plastic seats and a proper counter staffed by two agents. I asked for two tickets to Cairo, selected our seats, paid in cash, and thanked the staff. The entire transaction took four or five minutes, and I felt like a jackass. We had walked five miles across Sigalla and Al Dahar; it took three frustrating hours. We should have taken a taxi; then we could have strolled the streets and found a café and browsed the shops. Instead, we were covered in sweat and dust, just like always. I asked Teresa, jokingly, if she wanted to walk back, but she didn’t appreciate my humor. I flagged a taxi.

We had dinner reservations that evening, for another restaurant, somewhere near the golf course, I think. I don’t know, we got lost on the way over, which I wish were a joke, but isn’t. In any case, the food was great, Teresa enjoyed another local brew, and we almost forgot about our ridiculous walk that afternoon.

“What do you want to do tomorrow?” I asked.

“Not. One. Damn. Thing,” Teresa answered.

The next day, we did exactly that. We slept late, ate breakfast late, sat on the beach, and lazed by the pool. Teresa read a book for some hours while I paced across the patio. The pool area was quiet; most everyone else had gone off to Luxor or Cairo or they were at the beach or they had hired a boat for the day. Five or six people sat in beach chairs under the umbrellas. They lounged and lazed and kept to themselves. One of the women, a twenty-something blonde, wore a skimpy two-piece bikini. I hadn’t thought anything of it – bikinis are the official uniform of summer back home. Then I realized that she had removed her top and lay face down on her chair, to sun her back. Again, back home, I might not have noticed. But we were in Egypt, and it was the middle of Ramadan. I wondered what the staff thought of this young woman, and though no one scolded her (bikinis are allowed in many tourist hotels), I imagine that many of the men were insulted. I thought back to the family at Mena House. The mother wore an abaya, and the daughter wore a burkini. Hurghada is a long way from Giza.

The next day, we took a taxi to the Go Bus station where we caught our bus to Cairo. The trip was the polar opposite of our Harmony Jet experience, and worth only a bare description. The bus, like the station, was modern and clean and perfectly comfortable. I counted eight other passengers, all Egyptian, plus the driver and a steward. The steward showed us to our seats and chatted with us for a few minutes. We stopped at El Gouna along the way and picked up another couple. Then the steward distributed snack boxes to each of the passengers. The box included pastries and bottled water and toiletries. Other than that, the ride was quick and quiet. Teresa admired the Red Sea for several hours, while I admired the half-built apartment blocks that lined the coast for hundreds of miles. The bus dropped us at Midan Abdel Moneim Riad, near Hilton Ramses, and we walked over the river, to the Novotel where we had stayed a couple weeks earlier.





Lost in Translation





At breakfast, the next morning, Teresa and I sat across from each other, in a small booth, near a table stuffed with soft fruits and stale breads. Teresa stared at her food and sipped from a mug of coffee while I flipped through the maps in our guidebook. We sat there for a long while, but didn’t say much. We were bored of hotels and breakfast buffets and each other. Teresa coughed and sniffed and sighed, and I noticed that the fellow sitting at the table behind her was smoking. Smoking Man blew rings of yellow cigarette smoke in the air, and between exhalations of tar and nicotine he shouted into a cell phone. His words bounced off the walls in angry bursts of garbled syllables and snorts. I watched as he lit a second cigarette and let it warm in an ashtray while he sucked on the stick still burning in his mouth. Teresa guessed that he couldn’t read the No Smoking sign on his table. I guessed that he could read it just fine, he just didn’t care.

Somewhere between the puffs of cigarette smoke, Cairo, the city we learned to love a few weeks earlier, lost its luster. All we could see was a smoke-filled dining room, and a loud, obnoxious business traveler. Teresa scowled while she ate. The food was OK, she said, “not bad for Ramadan.” I was less cheerful. I spread a lump of cold butter on a roll and watched the dry bread splinter into a thousand crumbs. My orange juice, some syrupy concoction of sugar and colored water, tasted of burnt dirt and stung my mouth. Not bad for Ramadan, I thought. The food wasn’t the problem, and Smoking Man was no worse than anyone we’d bump into back home. Cairo was just a layover, not a destination, and we were anxious to move along.

After breakfast, and a lungful of secondhand smoke, we walked to the Go Bus station – it was right where we left it the day before, at Midan Abdel Moniem Ryiad. We bought tickets, for the next morning, to Alexandria. We knew exactly where to go, what to buy, and how much to pay. There were no lines, no burly security officers, and no apologies for canceled service or restricted routes. Our bus would be an executive-class motor coach, with onboard entertainment, light snack, steward, and water closet, just like the bus we enjoyed from Hurghada to Cairo the day before. We would meet the bus, the next morning, at the station, the ticket agent told us, and travel, nonstop, to Alexandria, she promised. Though we couldn’t find the Alexandria station, Moharam Beik, on any map in our guidebook, it was “quite near downtown,” she said, “near city center.”

Afterward, we stood on the curb, in front of the Go Bus office, and debated what to do. Teresa suggested, once again, that we visit Khan al-Khalili, the ancient market. From there we could tour Islamic Cairo, the historic, royal enclave and walled city built for the Fatimid caliphs in the tenth century. I had little interest in the khan – our guidebook gave it a decent review at best – but Islamic Cairo sounded interesting. The night before, I browsed the Internet, and searched, haphazardly, for information about Cairo and its neighborhoods. On one website, I found a portfolio of fin de siècle drawings – pastels, gouache, and pencil sketches – from Cairo. The period drawings celebrated a Cairo we had yet to see, the kind represented in dime-store novels and schlocky Hollywood films. I downloaded a copy of Conrad Carelli’s Scenes in Cairo, a black-and-white painting in which men and women – rounded stick figures draped in white – strolled the streets of Cairo under a sky laced with canopies and wire. I saved another image – Street Scene, Cairo by the Italian master, Vittorio Rappini – in which a woman dressed in a long, white robe carries a basket of bread on her head. Behind her, a group of men rest on a stoop while they mend hand-stitched carpets. In a third image, a colorful gouache by the German painter Georg Macco, crowds of men and women stroll through a broad square, the massive dome of a nearby mosque overhead. In the background, merchants display their wares: melons, baskets, and fanous. I wanted to visit that version of Cairo – the one without traffic, without smog, without bombs.

“Let’s try it,” I said.

While Teresa consulted our guidebook for information, I unfolded our map of Cairo that Samii, the concierge at Ramses Hilton, had given to us some weeks earlier. I traced the map east and north and east again till I spotted the words Khan al-Khalili surrounded by symbols for historic, defensive walls, towering gates, ancient markets, and important mosques. A long walk to a historic neighborhood sounded fun. I leaned forward, map in hand, and showed Teresa the route we could take.

“We would follow Abdel Khalek Tharwat to…”

Teresa put one hand on her hip and stared through me.

“It’s about two miles,” I said, “maybe a bit more.”

Teresa didn’t move, she didn’t say a word. We would take a taxi instead.

“Hello. Khan al-Khalili, please. How much?” The driver frowned and asked me a question. Clearly, he had no idea what I said, which was fair, because I had no idea what he said, either. I repeated myself. Slowly. “Hello. Khan al-Khalili, please. How much?” The driver frowned harder. He looked as lost as I felt. I leaned through the passenger window, pointed to a spot on my city map, and tried again. “Khan al-Khalili?”

The driver held the map in his right hand. I watched his eyes scan the page for a minute till he realized where we wanted to go. “Hanalahleelee? No!” He shouted at me with disgust, as though I had insulted his mother. As the taxi sped away, its tires spit dust and gravel in my face. Teresa jumped back from the curb and covered her eyes.

I flagged down a second taxi, asked for a ride to Khan al-Khalili, and again, the driver yelled “No!” and sped away in a cloud of dust.

Teresa wanted to try, so she hailed a third taxi. I listened to her ask the driver for a ride to Khan al-Khalili, and I watched the driver’s smile evaporate when he heard where we wanted to go. He sped away in a cloud of dust.

“I’ll go inside, to the hotel,” Teresa said. “I’ll ask the concierge for help.”

While I waited by the curb, a dozen taxi drivers stopped and honked their horns to get my attention. I waved them away.

“We’re saying it wrong,” Teresa said. “It’s not Khan al-Khalili, it’s Honalahlayli. Or something like that. Anyway, the concierge wrote it down for me, in Arabic, and he wrote down the price, too. We can hire a Rawas car for fifty-four pounds. A taxi in front of the hotel would be twenty-five, he said. It’s with a tourist fee. But if we get a taxi on the street, it’s fifteen pounds. What do you want to do?”

“Wait, what do you mean, we were pronouncing it wrong? Khan. Al. Khalili. What’s so wrong with that?”

“Trust me, when I said it to the concierge he laughed at me. He said something like Honelahleelee. Let’s just go.”

I flagged a fourth taxi – an older model with an exhaust leak and a cracked windshield. The driver, who was far too tall for the car, leaned through the window, like a cartoonish stick figure, and read our note. “Yes,” he said with a smile, “Hanalahleelee. Fifteen.”

Khan al-Khalili occupies a few dozen feddans in the heart of the ancient, walled city. The market is named for Jaharkas al-Khalili al-Yalbughawi, a fourteenth-century Mamluk, who, like most Mamluks, despised the Fatimid caliphate that founded Cairo and ruled Egypt for centuries. Al-Khalili, being especially bitter, decided to build his market on the very ground which held the turbet al-za'afran, the mausoleum in which generations of Fatimid caliphs and their families were laid to rest. The mausoleum and its contents would have to go. André Raymond, in Cairo, a remarkable biography of the city, described the desecration that followed. After the mausoleum was leveled, and its stones carted away, the skeletal remains therein, he wrote, were “loaded into baskets and thrown onto the mounds of rubble east of the city.” In its place, al-Khalili built a public inn, much like a modern motel, and a caravansary around which merchants displayed their products. This was a grand bazaar where Cairenes could buy, sell, and trade just about anything. The original caravansary was destroyed, in the fifteenth century, and replaced, in stages, over the next few centuries. Today, the khan’s narrow streets, paved in cobbled stones and handmade bricks, wind between five-story apartment blocks where every doorway leads to a shop or artisan or a bakery.

“Is this good?” the driver asked.

On the ten-minute drive to the khan that morning, I tried to follow our route on the map in my hand, but the driver took a shortcut and I quickly lost our place. He raced east and south and west and east again. We spent a few minutes on the 6 October Bridge and a few more in a narrow alley behind a donkey-powered trailer. The driver honked and cursed. The donkey swung its tail. I could only guess where we were. I stared out the window and saw an open square decorated with dark, green grass, shade trees, and benches. If it were the main gate to Khan al-Khalili or Islamic Cairo, I certainly didn’t know it.

The driver smiled and asked again, “Is this good?”

“Yes, thank you. Shokrun.”

Teresa found a bench, sat, and flipped through the guidebook. “I think we’re here,” she said. “In front of the Sayyidna al-Hussein mosque.”

Originally built in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the mosque, named for Husayn ibn Ali, a grandson of Prophet Mohammed, has been enlarged and remodeled several times. A few elements of the original structure survive and a knowledgeable tour guide can pinpoint the doors and stucco panels and stones from the original structure. Completed in 1870, the mosque blends Islamic and Greek Revivalist features including several arcades and pillars decorated with gypsum and ivory and bronze. For those who like to keep count, the mosque includes a domed mausoleum, two towering minarets, and a fifty-foot battlement capped with decorative parapets. It also houses several important relics, including, perhaps, the severed head of Hussein, which is stored in a large zarih (rectangular enclosure) made of solid silver and engraved with Quranic verses. For this reason, the mosque is one of the holiest Islamic sites in Egypt, and though Teresa and I were welcome to admire its façade and the exterior grounds, we were not allowed to enter the mosque.

“I wonder if that’s why the drivers wouldn’t take us here,” Teresa said. “It’s Ramadan, and here we are at the holiest site in Egypt!”

“Oh, I read about this place,” I said. “There was a suicide bombing here a few years ago. Back in oh-nine, I think. A French girl, a teenager, she was killed, and a bunch of people were injured. And there was another one, in Khan al-Khalili, back in oh-five. A few people were killed then, too. Does it mention that in the guidebook?” Teresa walked away.

From the mosque, we followed a stone path toward the market. On one side, we found a small café; it was open, but quiet and empty. Beyond the square, and past the café, the path split in two directions, neither of which looked particularly interesting. Teresa had a plan, so I let her lead the way. We followed a narrow alley lined with storefronts and doorways shuttered behind steel gates. The alley twisted right and left, and as we walked further into the maze the buildings closed over the road. The blue sky disappeared behind sun-bleached, green awnings and oversized roofs of corrugated steel. The sound of our footsteps echoed off the stone walls around us like the opening scene of a film noir.

“Here it is,” Teresa said. She pointed to a storefront, a tall, arched doorway capped with decorative wooden latticework, next to which a sign read El Fishawy. Probably the most famous ahwa in Cairo, if not the world, Qahwat al-Fishawi opened in the mid-eighteenth century and serves teas and coffees and shisha. In the last two centuries, the coffeehouse has served drinks and tobacco to some of the world’s most influential politicians and writers, among them, Naguib Mahfouz, a Nobel laureate whose works celebrate and eviscerate Egyptian life. Mahfouz was a regular customer in the mid-twentieth century and here wrote part of his most famous novel, Midaq Alley, which tells the story of life in Islamic Cairo in the 1940s. Other famous visitors, according to the cafe’s guest register, include poet Ahmad Rami, King Farouk, and author Alex Haley.

Teresa read about Fishawy in our guidebook and dreamed of mint tea and aromatic tobacco; we would sit for a while, she said, and relax with a hot drink. We would admire the dark woodwork and chat with local poets and artists and singers and songwriters. We would listen to the sounds of the souq – merchants, garbage collectors, and beggars – and lose ourselves, if only for an hour, to the charms of the city’s oldest coffeehouse. But the café was closed for the morning. We stood outside Fishawy and stared at the door. I asked Teresa whether she wanted to pose for a photo next to the sign.

“No,” she said, “why bother?”

With so many of the storefronts closed, we turned our eyes upward. Teresa admired the ancient city gates and the intricate masonry of the towering, stone walls and the mashrabiya (ornate bay windows on the upper floors), while I counted the power lines precariously strung between the buildings. That can’t be safe, I thought.

From Khan al-Khalili, we followed Sikket Al Badestan, a narrow alley, through the heart of the gold district where we found more blocks of shuttered storefronts. The goldsmiths were closed, their gates pulled tight against the day. Teresa snapped a few photos to capture the morning’s solitude. In one shot, a minaret climbs high above the street, like a Saturn V rocket ready for launch. In another shot, a sliver of sunlight pierces through a crack in the makeshift roof overhead and casts a warm glow in an empty square. Once again, in a city of seventeen million people, we had the street to ourselves. To this day, I remember the alley, though I can’t remember how we found it. We stopped to enjoy the peace and quiet there, if only for a minute. Then, as we crossed through the next square, I can’t remember which one, an older fellow with a round face joined us on our walk. He told us about the goldsmiths and the spices and the essences. He knew where to find them all, he said, for the best price, of course. We ignored his pitch, but he wasn’t done. The khan, he informed us, was founded by so-and-so for such-and-such. I can’t remember exactly what he said because I wasn’t listening. “Please, sir, don’t follow us,” I said firmly, but politely. Our would-be tour guide mumbled something under his breath and threw a crumpled, dirty napkin at me. For the only time in my life, I was glad not to understand Arabic.

Our route that morning twisted and turned and overlapped till we had crossed the quarter several times, from every angle. After an hour or so, as the morning passed to afternoon, the stalls and storefronts opened in ones and twos, and the narrow alleys filled with merchants, distributors, and customers. One stall, partially covered by a giant, blue tarp, displayed bolts of fabric, colorful scarves, shawls, saraogs, and lace. Another displayed shelves filled with kanakha (long, fluted coffee pots), porcelain teapots, decorative serving trays, and rows of silver spoons. On another block, we passed a shisha shop, its door was shuttered, but through the small window, we spied colorful hookah and all the intricate replacement parts a smoker might need: bowls, hoses, trays, and screens all decorated with flashy colors and geometric patterns.

We turned a corner, onto a larger road, where modern storefronts lined both sides. Here the shops, for the most part, were already open, and they seemed to specialize in household goods, luggage, clothing, and all those things we neither wanted, nor needed. A young man sat on a milk crate in the shade near one shop. He chatted into his cell phone and fanned himself with a newspaper. As we passed by, he put his foot in front of me and pointed, with his newspaper, toward his shop.

“That’s your sales pitch?” I muttered. “You can’t even put down your cell phone while you trip me?”

The shopkeeper, who somehow heard my muttered comment, grew furious. His face turned bright pink and he spewed a string of insults at me, few of which I understood, except by the intonation of his voice. The poor fellow desperately wanted to insult me so he switched to a few choice words in English. “Ugly!” He paused to form another insult. “Redneck!”

“What was that all about?” Teresa asked.

“I don’t know,” I said. “He had a colorful vocabulary, though.”

We turned another corner and followed a narrow alley back into the khan. A moped raced past; the driver navigated between us and the stone wall, with an inch or so to spare. His passenger, a young boy, carried a stack of cardboard. He waved to Teresa, smiled, and shouted something we couldn’t understand beyond its obvious vulgarity. A cloud of black exhaust erupted from the tailpipe as he spoke. I wiped a bead of sweat from my brow.

“It’s time to go,” I said.

From the khan, Teresa and I strolled Shariʻa al-Muizz li-Deen Illah, a mile-long thoroughfare that forms the backbone of Islamic Cairo. The road is named for the caliph who founded Cairo, and the ancient neighborhood houses mosques, mausoleums, wikala (caravansaries including a famed spice market and perfume market), madrasas (Islamic schools), and several museums. Many of the buildings here, a couple hundred by some counts, date back to the Medieval and Ottoman periods. Despite their historic significance, centuries of use and neglect threatened to destroy the neighborhood and its buildings. Walls crumbled to dust at the lightest touch; sewer water seeped through the ancient foundations and soaked the thick, stone walls; mounds of trash filled the gutters and blocked the lanes. The buildings were caked in soot from truck and scooter traffic that ran down the crumbling street; thick smog, laden with acidic particles, consumed the soft stones and dissolved the intricate engravings and decorative masonry. Homeless families squatted in the alleys off the main road, and workshops and small factories polluted the air with toxic fumes. By the 1990s, Islamic Cairo needed a major facelift. An international group of donors and conservationists rescued the neighborhood from a slow demise, and, today, Shariʻa al-Muizz looks and feels much like it did in its heyday, centuries ago.

Although many of the buildings have been renovated over the last few decades, many still show their age. In many places, the lower walls and gates are speckled and stained, as though a Biblical flood washed through the neighborhood and left behind a mile-long path of destruction. The stones are splayed and many of the buildings need more attention than they may ever receive. But just above eye-level, the intricate masonry, often decorated with alternating rows of reds and browns and yellows, looks brand new. Many of the ancient buildings here are marked with rusted, brass signs that detail, in English and Arabic, the name, monument number, and year of construction. Each sign includes a pair of dates – representing the Islamic and Gregorian calendars – and the ages alone are impressive. Al-Malik as-Salih Najm al-Din Ayyub’s mausoleum (monument number thirty-eight if you’re keeping count), for example, dates to 648 Anno Hegirae (AD 1248) a sign declared. All things considered, the building looked quite well.

Our tour of Islamic Cairo ended at the Bab al-Futuh, a massive, fortified gate built into the northern wall of the old Fatimid city. During our brief tour of the neighborhood, we passed dozens of historic sites dating across ten centuries. We had seen the immortal ruins of Fatimid and Ayyubid and Mamluk and Ottoman regimes. Generations of history perched on overlapping foundations, in the shadow of competing ideologies where caliphs subscribed to one lineage or another. It would be difficult to describe the wealth of history, architecture, and theology preserved along Shariʻa al-Muizz, but our guidebook sure tried. Its pages spewed a long list of historic sites and peculiar history with dates and names and associations we could never remember and never forget. Its last entry was among its most noteworthy.

Teresa stopped on the side of the road, just below the ancient city gate. “This is the Mosque of Al-Hakim,” she read aloud. “It’s named for a Fatimid caliph who reigned for twenty-four years, but he killed a bunch of people, he might have been insane it says. But oh, he disappeared one night and some people think he ascended to Heaven.”

“That doesn’t sound like anyone I want to visit,” I said.

“Well, it says the mosque was used as a Crusaders’ prison, a stable, a warehouse, and, oh, wait, it says it was restored in the 1980s, and it’s not very interesting after all. It says the most interesting part is the minarets. They date to 1304, it says, and they’re the oldest in the city.”

We stared up toward the sky, to admire the towering minarets, which, at first, we couldn’t see. We expected a pair of towering white and green needles, like the minarets we had admired all over Egypt. Instead, we saw a high wall fronted by an impressive, and foreboding, arched portico. The portico’s twin, thirty-foot tall towers were covered in alternating bands of decorative masonry and engraved in Kufic, an ancient, calligraphic variant of Arabic script. The enclosure wall, a smooth, vertical sheet of grey stone, loomed against the blue sky like the pylons we admired at Karnak, but there were no obvious minarets.

“Wait, is that one?” I asked.

Off in the distance, on the far corner of the enclosure wall, past the portico, a square tower (called a salient) rose above the courtyard, and above that, rose a thinner square tower, and above that rose an octagonal stone tower, and above that rose a fluted column that looked a bit like a rounded chef’s hat. The second minaret was even less obvious. It also stood on a tall base encased in a square shroud. Its fluted crown rose above the mosque’s courtyard like an ornate smokestack. If not for the brief mention in our guidebook, we may never have known that we were staring at a mosque at all, let alone the two oldest minarets in Cairo.

We passed through the ancient gate, and, just like that, we were back in Cairo, surrounded by cars (honk), trucks (honk), and scooters (beep). Teresa skimmed our guidebook for last minute factoids about the old quarter while I shuffled my feet in the sand. I noticed an old woman; she wore a dusty black abaya and sat on a stone near the gate. I remembered that we had packed a lunch of sorts: those two snack boxes that we got the day before, on the bus from Hurghada. I gave the bag to the woman and walked back to the street, to find Teresa. She had thumbed through our guidebook and found a subway station marked on the map. “Let’s take the train,” she said. As we turned to walk away, I felt a tug on my elbow. The little old woman stood at my waist and bowed several times. She opened the bag of food and showed it to me, just in case I forgot how we knew each other. I’m not sure what she said, but she seemed very happy with the gift. In any other situation, I might have hugged her, but it was Egypt, and it was Friday, and it was Ramadan, so I just smiled.

At dinner, that evening, Teresa and I sat across from each other, at a high-top table at Dido’s, in Zamalek. We sat there for a while, but didn’t say much – our bellies were too full. I asked Teresa what she thought of the khan. She liked it, and was glad to be there before the stores opened, even though she wished we had found an open café. Then Teresa asked me what I thought of Islamic Cairo. I searched for a word to describe the day. I remembered a woman I saw there. She wore a long, green and white abaya; she carried a tray of fresh-baked bread in one hand, and balanced another tray of bread on her head. I saw a man dressed in a long gray djellaba and oversized sandals; he carried a heavy, nylon sack over his shoulder; its contents were a mystery to me. A young boy sat on top of an oak barrel; he tapped his feet on the barrel and sang a song to himself. A tired donkey, strung to a short, wooden trailer, stood on the side of the road. Its owner, a teenaged boy dressed in jeans and T-shirt, ran from door to door, to collect flattened cardboard. He shouted a poem, in Arabic, and though I didn’t know the words, I imagined it was a few lines about his work. He was, I presumed, one of the city’s Zabaleen, garbage collectors who live in Manshiyat Naser, a slum east of downtown Cairo. I thought about everything we saw in Islamic Cairo that day. In many ways, it was just like the old drawings I admired the night before. “I liked it,” I said.





City by the Sea





From Cairo, we would travel north, to Alexandria and the Mediterranean Sea. Our guidebook cautiously recommended a few sites to visit, but they also warned of traffic and noise and grubby beaches. To me, Alexandria sounded dreary, but Teresa insisted we go. There would be plenty to see and do, she insisted. I wondered whether she had read the same guidebook that I had.

That night, while Teresa slept, I downloaded a handful of books about Alexandria. First, I browsed E. M. Forster’s Alexandria: A History and a Guide, the classic monograph cited in every reading list. Forster, who lived in Alexandria during the First World War, adored the city’s history, but his affection bore a caveat. He warned that the “‘sights’ … are in themselves not interesting, but they fascinate when we approach them through the past.” Next, I turned to André Aciman’s Out of Egypt, a memoir that celebrates and mourns the old city. Aciman lived in Alexandria in the years after the Second World War. In his memoir, he recounts his youth, surrounded by an eccentric family who lived a life of comfort and leisure. His Alexandria sounded glorious, but it came to a sudden end, in 1965, when Aciman and his family were forcefully evicted from the country. Their crime was one of heritage – they were Jews. Next, I turned to Michael Palin, of Monty Python fame. Our guidebook quoted his book, Around the World in 80 Days, in which he wrote that the Corniche is like “Cannes with acne.” I remembered the book – Palin has a long series of travel books, and Teresa owns all of them. I found a copy, on-line, and browsed the section on Alexandria. In a few, short pages, Palin described a terrifying and maddening city. Of course, he was in a hurry and only spent a few hours in Alexandria, but it made me wonder what we would find there; it made me wonder whether we should go at all.

The next morning, we walked from Zamalek, over the bridge, to the Go Bus station. The lights were off, and the air was warm and fetid, like always. A dozen passengers lazed about the room; some fidgeted with their bags, others stared at their phones. Nobody spoke, nobody wanted to be there, and nobody wanted to go where they were going, except for Teresa. She gazed at a map in our guidebook. She found Alexandria, on the western edge of the Delta, surrounded by blue and green – an oasis in every sense of the word. She hoped the bus would follow the Nile downriver, all the way to the sea. She dreamt of quaint villages and pleasure boats and children splashing in the river. We had seen those things before, in Aswan, and Teresa hoped to see more of the same. She showed the map to the clerk.

“Excuse me. We’re going to Alexandria today. Can you show me which way we’ll go?”

The clerk, a young, round-faced woman, laughed aloud and took the guidebook. She stared at the map, then drew her finger across the page. “This road here,” she said.

Teresa smiled. “Oh, thank you. Do you think we’ll see the Nile on the way?”

The clerk smiled back at her. “Maybe, if you look hard enough, you can see anything you want,” she said.

I wondered how long the trip would take.

“Two hours, plus traffic, and a break for the driver. You can take a break, too, if you like. The bus will stop, but you can keep going if you like,” she said.

I asked where the bus would stop.

“Oh, city center,” she said, “all buses stop at city center.” She pointed to a row of hard, plastic chairs and suggested we sit. “The driver is late,” she said, “but don’t worry, he will be here soon. Enjoy your trip.”

An hour later, and an hour behind schedule, a Go Bus agent led us across the street, through traffic, to the parking lot at Midan Abdel Moneim Riad. He pointed toward a bus and said, “Alexandria.” The bus was no executive-class motor coach, and there would be no onboard entertainment, no light snack, no steward, and no water closet. Teresa told me not to worry. “It’s only two hours,” she said. We took our seats in the front row, just behind the driver. As the bus pulled into traffic, Teresa adjusted her scarf, pulled the curtain over the window, and scribbled notes in her diary. I stared straight ahead, at the cars and trucks and buses and scooters and plumes of exhaust and brake lights that stretched to the horizon from Cairo to Zamalek to Giza to the desert. I looked down, down at the bus driver. He had one hand on the wheel, and one on the dial of a portable radio. With one hand, he switched between lanes of traffic, hopelessly searching for a few feet of faster ground; with the other hand he switched between radio stations, hopelessly searching for better music. I looked in the rearview mirror and surveyed the other bus passengers. Six men and women filled a few rows in the middle of the bus. We met them, just briefly, earlier that morning, at the bus station in Cairo. They were Korean college students, in Egypt on a short tour, one of the men told me.

“Alexandria?” he asked, worried that they had missed the bus.

“Yes,” I said, as I showed my ticket to him, “but this is Egypt, and schedules are recommendations, not promises.” I wondered whether he understood my joke, but I’m sure he understood my sentiment: wait.

Behind the students, in the rear of the bus, a young Egyptian couple relaxed while their two young boys sprawled across the last row of seats. They looked happy but tired, and they kept to themselves. I next turned my eyes to the fellow in the seat directly across the aisle from me. He wore business casual attire with his polo shirt neatly pressed and buttoned tightly under his chin. I wondered what brought him to Alexandria. He had no bags. On his lap, he held two phones, one in each hand, and throughout our trip, he took several brief calls. He reminded me of Wei, the Chinese businessman we had met on the bus to Abu Simbel. Wei would have loved our trip to Alexandria, Wei seemed to love everything. Right then, I wished I were Wei.

Teresa looked up from the guidebook. “Maybe today we’ll see the catacombs and the Roman amphitheatre, and tomorrow we’ll visit the new library and the palace gardens. It says there are great cafes, and the Corniche runs for miles along the sea. Our hotel is on the Corniche, right? What do you want to do first?”

Teresa was already in love with Alexandria. I wished I could share her enthusiasm, but I am cursed with pragmatism and pessimism.

“I don’t know,” I said, “we have to get out of Cairo first.”

Teresa sighed and put her head on my shoulder.

After Giza, the traffic melted away as the bus turned north, on the Desert Highway. A few minutes later, the driver’s radio lost all reception, and he shut it off. I looked back at the rearview mirror. The Egyptian family were asleep, the Korean tourists were asleep, and the businessman was asleep. Teresa curled up against the window and nodded off. I closed my eyes and wished I could fall asleep, but the road was a bit too bumpy, and the bus was a bit too warm. Suddenly, the driver slammed on the brakes. I looked through the windshield and watched as the pavement disappeared into a cloud of dust. The highway was caught in some miserable purgatory halfway between destruction and construction; a hundred miles of roadworks shuttered for the month of Ramadan. Orange traffic cones and mounds of gravel marked the travel lanes for much of the way. Hulking tractors, graders, and dump trucks idled on the unpaved shoulders – steel giants left to rot in the summer sun. The driver shifted into low gear, and the bus crawled along the naked roadbed.

Four hours after we left Cairo, we approached a toll plaza marked in Greek lettering: Alexandria. The stucco arch over the plaza was cracked and pockmarked; the plaster haphazardly held together with scaffolding and chicken wire. The air turned acrid, like burnt coffee, and my eyes watered; I wondered whether there were an oil refinery nearby. In the distance, past a long, narrow pond of greasy-blue water, I counted rows of apartment blocks and warehouses and water towers on the horizon. Everything was stained yellow like the teeth of an elderly smoker.

This can’t be Alexandria, please don’t let this be Alexandria.

Teresa flipped through the maps in our guidebook. “I think we’re near the airport,” she said. “I thought this was an express bus. Why are we stopping here?” Her enthusiasm for Alexandria dissolved into frustration. She wanted to be on the Corniche; she wanted to dip her toes in the sea; she wanted a cold shower and a soft bed.

The bus rolled to a slow stop alongside a concrete platform on the far side of some sprawling parking lot. We were surrounded by a thousand buses, microbuses, taxis, cars, and people. Taxi drivers and touts swarmed the platforms. They picked at the buses like starved mice at a crumb. They surrounded our bus. Some shouted and pointed while others pulled at the bus door. Our driver cut the motor, opened the door, and disappeared into the crowd. We never saw him again. We sat, resolute, in our front row seats, and watched the game unfold. We watched the Egyptian businessman slip through the door and disappear into the crowd. We never saw him again. We watched the young Egyptian family march to the front of the bus, down the stairs and through the open door. They, too, disappeared into the crowd. We never saw them again. We watched the Korean college students. They moved slowly and cautiously to the door, then, one-by-one, they slinked off the bus, into the crowd. We never saw them again. Still, we stayed put.

“Maybe the driver will come back, to take us into town,” I said.

Teresa mumbled something about “the city center.”

“No, I don’t think this is the city center…” I said.

Teresa interrupted me. “No,” she said. “I mean I just found City Center on the map. Look.” She opened the guidebook and pointed to the map. “The ticket agent, when she said ‘city center’ she didn’t mean downtown. See?”

Dammit. We were so sure the bus would stop in downtown, in the city center, that we never bothered to check our guidebook. If we had, we might have seen that we were in the middle of nowhere. I stared at the map and grumbled. Where are we? This can’t be Alexandria. This can’t be the city center. In fact, it was, but it wasn’t. City Center, I later learned, is a modern, full-service shopping mall with marble floors, ice-cold air-conditioning, restaurants, grocery store, and a cinema. The development fills a larger corner of Moharem Bek, a sprawling neighborhood south and east of downtown Alexandria. On-line, the mall sounded quite nice, but City Centre is, in fact, several miles from the city center, which, I quickly learned, didn’t matter, because we were nowhere City Center either. In fact, we were on some unpretty industrial road between the mall and the airport. I flipped through the guidebook, lost in maps and tiny fonts and wondering whether to buy reading glasses when I got home. I drew my finger back and forth across the map. Dammit. There it was, right on the map in our guidebook, a little grey icon in the shape of a bus: Al Mo’af Al Gedid, the city’s newish intermodal bus station. We were nowhere downtown, nowhere near the Corniche, nowhere near our hotel.

We slipped off the bus and through the crowd of drivers. They grabbed at our bags and pulled on my sleeves. Where you go? Where you go? They followed us across the parking lot, through the gate, and down the road. Charlie Brown! How are you? You see my Cadillac? Let’s go Charlie Brown. One driver jumped in front of us and ordered us to stop. “No, you can’t go that way,” he said. He might have been right, but I didn’t care. I swung my backpack at him and shouted. I don’t remember what I said, but I’m sure it was awful. He laughed and walked away. We turned a corner, down a busy road surrounded, on both sides, by towering chain link fences capped with barbed wire. As we struggled down the road, on a narrow shoulder, over broken slabs of concrete and clumps of dirt, I noticed a taxi driving alongside us.

“Please,” the driver said, “you are not safe here. Where you go? I will take you.”

“La, shokrun,” I said as I waved him off.

“No, please, I am telling you truth, Alexandria is very far. What hotel you go? I will take you there. My taxi has a meter, I do not lie. Look.”

I did look. I looked at Teresa. Her jeans were caked in dust, her T-shirt faded and soaked in sweat, her sneakers streaked in chalk, her face was brown and freckled, and her straw hat drooped down around her eyes and ears. She looked completely, utterly ridiculous – I’m sure that I looked even worse.

“Hilton Corniche. How much, please?”

The driver thought for a long moment. “Hil-tone? City beach?”

“No, Hilton Corniche.”

“Yes, Hil-tone City Beach.”

Teresa tapped me on the shoulder. “I think he’s saying Sidi Bishr,” she said. She pointed once more at our map of Alexandria, and there it was, a neighborhood on the ass end of Alexandria, a dozen miles away, Sidi Bishr.

“Yes,” I said, “Hilton Sidi Bishr.”

“It’s far. Gas is expensive. Fifty pounds, no more, no less.”

The driver, Imad, was bald and short, but stout, like a bulldog. He drove with one thick, brown hand cloaked over the steering wheel, and one thick brown hand on his horn. He was a madman in a city of madmen: he tailgated; he weaved between lanes; he sped the wrong way down one-way streets through heavy traffic. Imad deserved an award and a prison sentence; you would just have to catch him first. He drove so wildly that, I’m sorry to report, I barely remember the road to Sidi Bishr. I would like to say it were pretty or interesting or somehow noteworthy. I would like to say that the Corniche were beautiful, and that Alexandria reminded me of Biarritz or Venice, but, from the back seat of Imad’s taxi, Alexandria was little more than a blurred mess of towers and roads. I do remember the traffic, the noise, and the smell of burnt oil, and I remember Imad and his horn. The contraption, some after-market toy hotwired to his dashboard, made a thousand noises: shriek, whoop, wee-ohhh, chirp, and so on. Imad loved his horn, and he demonstrated that love for a dozen miles across Alexandria. True to his word, Imad delivered us safely, if not so soundly, at our hotel on the sea.

The Hilton towers over the Corniche with a dozen stories of whitewashed concrete and glass and magnificent views of the Mediterranean on three sides. Our room, on the top floor, had gleaming, white-tile floors, crisp, white sheets and duvets, and a large bath with a marble sink. It also had insufferable traffic noise, two beds with impossibly firm mattresses, and no air-conditioning. I called the front desk for help, and a few minutes later the hotel’s staff filed into our room. They poked and prodded and scratched their heads. The desk clerk, a petite, young woman with jet-black hair and dark eyes, apologized profusely. Her manager, a tall, thin man dressed in neat, grey slacks and a freshly-pressed, pink, button-up shirt, apologized profusely. The lead engineer, a barrel-chested man with a bright-red face, politely told me to rot.

“Summer,” he said with a shrug. “Today hot, yesterday cold. Tomorrow I don’t know.”

Teresa offered a solution. “Let’s go to the beach. I want to sit by the water. Maybe, by the time we get back, the A/C will kick in,” she said with more hope than confidence.

I’m not a beach person. In Hurghada, I dutifully dipped my toes in the Red Sea, but I never seriously considered going for a swim. Therefore, the idea of going to the beach in Alexandria seemed alien to me. The beach? Why? What did I ever do to you? I wanted to resist, but it was too late. Teresa stood in the doorway and smiled at me. My cause was lost, and I surrendered. “OK, but I want to go for lunch after.”

Earlier that afternoon, when we checked into the hotel, the desk clerk summarized the hotel’s amenities, which included access to a private beach, just across the street, but, she said, the shuttle bus was not running. I thought I misunderstood her.

“A shuttle bus? Is there another beach?” I asked.

“No, the beach is here,” she said, softly, while pointing through the hotel’s plate-glass façade, “across the Corniche. The shuttle bus runs at night. Ramadan.”

I was confused by the brief conversation, but thought nothing of it until later that day, when Teresa and I went to the beach, across the street. By then, late afternoon, the city had just stirred from its daylong slumber, and the Corniche was impassable. We had seen traffic all across Egypt, especially in Cairo. But Cairene traffic is heavy and thick – it moves in fits and starts. Not so in Alexandria. There, on that stretch of road between us and the beach, we watched as a million cars streaked by – six lanes across. We suddenly understood why the hotel offered a shuttle bus from the hotel to the beach – the beach across the street. Eventually, a delivery truck emerged from a side street next to the hotel. The driver rolled cautiously into traffic and then, for a brief moment, the traffic broke. We darted across the road, in the shadow of that truck, to the beach. Teresa looked at me. “Next time, we’ll take the shuttle bus,” she said.

The beach, a crescent of dark sand, followed the coast for a quarter-mile left and right. It was sectioned off by high walls; our hotel controlled one square, a few hundred feet across, open only to the sea. A large tent stood erect over the beach. The hotel would host an exclusive party that evening: a private iftar for the visiting Cairenes then asleep in their rooms. Several men and women, all dressed in black, puttered about. They shifted tables and chairs and umbrellas across the sand. I doubt whether they even noticed us, and we walked across the beach unmolested. Teresa dipped her toes in the sea, but the water was cold and she quickly retreated to the sand. We held hands and looked north, to the horizon. Teresa gasped as the sky filled with thick, white clouds. They were the first clouds we had seen in Egypt, and they were beautiful.

From the beach, we walked southward, along the Corniche, along the waterfront. Here, miles away from the city’s busier quarters, we often had the promenade to ourselves. To our left, across the street, beyond the lanes of rushing traffic, the Corniche was crowded with concrete towers; shuttered storefronts filled their ground floors. To our right, a low seawall followed the shore. We passed a group of shirtless, adolescent boys on the seawall. A few whistled, half-heartedly, at Teresa, but she didn’t notice, and I didn’t care. A mile down the road, we passed a busy intersection. A crowd of women stood in the street. Microbuses stopped every few minutes and swept them away, to town, to the bakeries, to the markets. Teresa suggested we catch a microbus to Midan Ramla, a busy neighborhood near the center of Alexandria. I liked the idea of Midan Ramla, but balked at the idea of a microbus. “Let’s find another way,” I said.

The Big Red Bus follows the Corniche from end to end, past all the tourist hotels and historic sites. In a sense, it’s a tour bus without the guide. The double-decker buses, painted fire-engine red, run about every fifteen to thirty minutes, our guidebook promised. Passengers should wait on the side of the road and flag down a bus as it approaches. The fare would be three pounds, cash only, pay on-board. Twenty minutes later, as promised, a Big Red Bus lumbered around the corner. Teresa climbed aboard first and rushed up to the second floor. She wanted a tourist’s view of the city. I paid the fare and darted after her. In my hurry to climb the stairs, I crushed my forehead against the ceiling. (I need not describe the pain.) When I recovered, I found Teresa, upstairs, in the front row. She was happy, much happier than me, so I bit my tongue and cursed under my breath.

The bus rumbled along the Corniche, with the sea to our right, the city to our left. While I sat there, glumly nursing my head, Teresa shouted out the names of all the major sites we passed. There were only a few other passengers onboard: young men and women who quietly kept to themselves. The seats were fairly comfortable, and my American hips almost fit between the armrests. The vents blew cool air against our faces, and our upper deck seats lifted us comfortably above the noise and exhaust of the surrounding traffic. If I were in a better mood, I might have thought it were quite pleasant. A fine way to travel, yes, yes indeed. Fifteen minutes later, the bus rolled to a stop on a busy corner tucked neatly between the sea and a busy, public square.

The city begged our attention from every direction. I turned first, to the Eastern Harbour. The beach was lined with chairs and parasols, empty, all of them, except for a few lazy pigeons. A breeze pushed the sea against the sand. This is where Alexander landed, in the fourth century BC, on his invasion tour of the Mediterranean. The harbor was then a wide, shallow channel between Pharos Island and Râ-Kedet, an Egyptian village on the mainland. Pharos was famous, described by Homer in his Odyssey, but Rhakotis, as the Greeks called it, was less so. Alexander quickly conquered Egypt and retuned to the harbor to build his namesake city. He and Dinocrates, his personal architect, laid out the city’s walls and palaces and temples amid a neat grid of broad avenues and tidy lanes, on a low rise, not far from Rhakotis. Meanwhile, the Greeks dredged the harbor and used that sand and soil to construct a causeway between island and the mainland. The causeway, called Heptastadion for the distance it covered, divided the old channel in two, and formed twin harbors (Western and Eastern). Several small islands filled the Eastern Harbour, just offshore. Cleopatra erected a palace there, on Antirhodos, but the palace and the island and 50,000 or so people were swept to the sea in a massive tsunami, sometime in the fourth century. The great Lighthouse, which stood on the tip of Pharos Island, by the Eastern Harbour, survived much later, but it too, fell to the sea. Meanwhile, the Heptastadion silted over and added a few acres to Alexandria’s waterfront, right about where the Anfoushi neighborhood now sits.

We crossed the Corniche, to Midan Saad Zaghloul, a public square where palm trees scrape the sky. An imposing statue of Zaghloul lords over the square now, but there, in a different era, stood the Caesareum of Alexandria, a temple dedicated by Cleopatra to her lover, Marc Antony. Two obelisks, seventy feet high and made of red granite, towered over that temple until the nineteenth century. The obelisks, nicknamed Cleopatra’s Needles, now stand, respectively, in New York City and London. The historic square holds another, darker place in its long history. Here, in the fifth century, Christian zealots captured and murdered Hypatia, the Roman polymath. The mob opposed her philosophy, and, for that offense, she was condemned to die a horrific death. The crowd beat her and tore her limb from limb – literally. Her corpse was burned on a pyre of brushwood. The statue of Saad Zhaghloul came much later.

We turned to admire Le Metropole Hotel, Alexandria’s oldest and grandest hotel. Built in 1902, the hotel stands out, like the prettiest of flowers, in the shadow of Alexandria’s brutal towers. Le Metropole’s façade, decorated with rows of Juliet balconies, would be at home along the Seine. The hotel’s common areas and guestrooms are decorated in period detail augmented with modern fixtures like flat-screen televisions and wireless Internet service. Constantine Cavafy, a famed poet, kept a room at Le Metropole. He composed many of his works there, in room 205, where he lived for twenty-five years. Teresa wanted to tour the hotel, but the doorman barred our entry: registered guests only. Instead, we crossed the street to inspect the Cecil, a magnificent hotel designed, in the Italianate style, by architect Alessandro Loria. The Cecil, then known as the Regina Palace, opened in 1929, at the height of Alexandria’s la belle époque, a period defined, in large part, by Loria’s hand. The hotel would be immortalized in The Alexandria Quartet (Lawrence Durrell) and Miramar (Naguib Mahfouz), but I was more interested in Albert Metzger, the man who commissioned the Cecil. He was a successful businessman, but he was also a French Jew. Conservative Alexandrians tolerated his heritage until 1957, when the government seized the hotel and forced the Metzger family, and thousands of others, to flee in a latter-day Exodus. Fifty years and one protracted lawsuit later, Metzger’s heirs quietly reclaimed the hotel, which they then resold to Egypt. Steigenberger, the German hotel company, now operates the Cecil, and they offer tours of the hotel, by appointment only.

By then we were famished, and we hoped it were late enough for lunch. Teresa suggested Taverna, an Italian restaurant recommended, quite highly, in our guidebook. We found Taverna, as advertised, on a narrow but busy road a block behind the Metropole, inconveniently next door to a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant. The sidewalks were jammed with shoppers, many of whom carried large boxes of pastries and fresh loaves of hot bread. A cook, dressed in the classical black-and-white checkered uniform, stood in front of a shawarma spit outside. The grilled meat looked and smelled absolutely delicious. A nearby menu listed the restaurant’s selection and prices, but the cook refused our order. He shook his head and pointed to the restaurant’s front door. There I saw a man slouched against the doorjamb, and I wondered whether he were asleep. He smiled weakly and welcomed us to Alexandria, as he half-heartedly pleaded with us to follow him upstairs. I recognized the trap, but Teresa insisted we give it a try. “It gets high marks in the book,” she said.

We had the restaurant to ourselves: cook, host, waiter, and busboy waited on us hand and foot, albeit very slowly. Our table – dark, stained wood topped with marble – overlooked the street, but the windows kept the noise and heat and exhaust at bay. I complained about the tourist menus, but Teresa insisted the prices were fine. She scolded me in front of the host. “Shut up and order. It’s Ramadan, these people haven’t eaten all day and you want to complain about the menu!” I ordered a pasta dish, and Teresa ordered the chicken shawarma with rice. We enjoyed the cold drinks, but I was too hot and too tired to enjoy the food. On our way out of the restaurant, I cracked my skull against a timber above the stairs. I probably cursed on my way out the door, but I honestly don’t remember.

I wanted to go back to the hotel – to nurse my swollen head – but Teresa had one more site in mind. “Let’s go see Fort Qa’itbay,” she said. “It’s right over there.” Teresa pointed to the horizon, at some smudge by the water, about two miles distant. This must be payback for Hurghada, I thought.

We followed the Corniche on its wide arc around the Eastern Harbour. After a long while, I swore I recognized that stretch of road. Then I remembered, it was there, some years earlier, that Michael Palin filmed a segment for the film version of Around the World in 80 Days. He arrived by ship, in the Western Harbour, and traveled by horse-drawn carriage along the Corniche to the train station. Palin seemed very unhappy with his excursion. As the title of his film and book would suggest, Palin was in a hurry, and he was frustrated that Larry (his driver, not the horse) insisted on a winding tour of the city. Palin also complained that the Corniche was “like Cannes, but with acne.” I understood his sentiment: the Corniche overwhelms and disappoints and thrills. Like Palin, I wanted to hurry along, but Teresa dawdled.

“Look at all the boats! We should go for a ride,” Teresa suggested. We were halfway to the fort, near the boathouse, and the water held an armada of tiny boats in its gentle grip. Dinghies and rafts and trawlers floated just offshore; their captains spied us from a mile off. It’s late, I would say, maybe tomorrow.

We had then entered Anfoushi, the old Turkish quarter. It was there that Durrell set the seedier scenes of The Alexandria Quartet, a series of novels based, in large part, on his experiences in the city. His “characters came in search of prostitutes and a bit of rough trade,” Lonely Planet said, but we saw nothing of the sort. Indeed, the Corniche soon calmed from a busy thoroughfare to a pleasant promenade. Young couples relaxed under parasols at curbside cafes; touts waved and pointed to their waterfront bistros; a man threw fish heads to a clowder of starved, feral cats; teenaged boys cast fishing lines to the sea; carriage drivers and taxi drivers offered tours to some unnamed market. Everyone seemed unhurried and friendly, and we felt none of the desperation we had witnessed in Luxor. In Alexandria, times were good. We stopped by the water to take a few photos. In those images, Teresa’s face is bright orange and freckled; she smiles widely. To her, the Corniche was all Cannes, no acne.

The Citadel of Qa’itby is an imposing, but picturesque, stone keep fronted by a wide courtyard and encircled by a high, crenellated, defensive wall. It stood guard over the city for hundreds of years, but was surprisingly ineffective; the Turks, French, and British each found their way past its garrisons. Today, the fortress serves as a maritime museum and tourist attraction, but, during Ramadan, it closes early. I pleaded with the guard, but he ignored my cries. Disappointed, we instead walked along the exterior walls, and Teresa recited the highlights from our guidebook. The fort, she read, sits on the very spot where the Lighthouse of Alexandria once stood. After a string of earthquakes, in the fifteenth century, the lighthouse tumbled to the sea. Shortly thereafter, Qa’it Bay, the sultan, commissioned a fort in its place. His masons incorporated stones from the lighthouse into the fort. We found one of those stones – a red granite pillar – folded into the fort’s foundation. “We should come back tomorrow,” Teresa said, “for the tour!”

No, what we should have done is turn around. We should have gone back to the hotel. We should have showered and dined and slept away the night. It would have been a fine way to end our day, with fond memories to recall years later, but Teresa had one more idea. She wanted to visit a palace, she said, on the far side of the Western Harbour, past the shipyards. “It won’t be long,” she said. I got my way in Hurghada, and Teresa got her way in Alexandria.

We hiked west, along a busy thoroughfare where the cars parked three deep and the sidewalks were impassable. Apartment blocks crowded the street and the air smelled of gas and oil and burning rubbish. I spotted a Big Red Bus and suggested we catch a ride back to the hotel, but Teresa wouldn’t hear me. “We’re almost there,” she said, “another bus will be along soon.” She was wrong on both counts.

The palace, Ras El Tin, looks over the harbor from its perch on the outer rim of the Western Harbour. On a map, the setting looked perfectly charming – a narrow peninsula leads the way along the Med to a large green belt. The palace is surrounded by gardens and fig trees for which the palace is named. There, in 1952, King Farouk abdicated his throne and launched his yacht to exile. The palace sounded worthy of a visit, but, these days, the palace is part of a naval base and visitors are not welcome – a fact which is printed in our guidebook, a fact that Teresa ignored. The palace is shuttered, and guarded by military police in light-armored trucks. We had walked all that way, through an ugly neighborhood, for nothing.

The sky turned dark as the sun set into the sea, which only made the road back longer and uglier. Two boys drove by on a scooter – they cursed at me and made lewd gestures to Teresa. I wanted to chase after them, to scold them, to smack them, but I was too tired.

Where is the Big Red Bus? It’s supposed to be down here, somewhere! We walked, and walked, but never saw another Big Red Bus that night. Instead, I held out my hand, and tried, in vain, to flag a taxi. The drivers wanted nothing to do with us. Some taxis were full, others were empty, but even then, the drivers passed by without slowing. We reached the citadel, then the harbor, then the Corniche. Miles passed under our feet. At Midan Ramla, I found a taxi caught in a circle of traffic. The driver demanded fifty pounds to take us back to the hotel – I countered with twenty, but he rolled up his window and drove away. A second driver rolled to a stop. He offered to take us home, but he, too, insisted on fifty pounds. Outrageous, I thought. A third driver pulled over. “Fifty pounds,” he said, “it’s Ramadan, very many people!” I found a fourth driver, caught at a light, and I desperately waved a twenty-pound note.

“What hotel?” he asked.

“Hilton Corniche.”

“OK,” he said.

Our detour to Ras El Tin consumed more than two hours and added miles to our walk. For nothing. It was just like our pointless walk across Hurghada a few days earlier. I wanted to say I told you so, but Teresa already knew. On any other day she would have stared out the window, she would have called out the sights, but, on that ride, she closed her eyes and winced. Alexandria flew by at fifty miles an hour and that wasn’t fast enough for us. We wanted to get back to our hotel, to wash off the stench and sweat.

“Wait, what hotel?”

“Hilton Corniche,” I said.

“Sidi Bishr?”

“Yes, city beach. Hil-tone.” I spoke slowly and clearly, like an idiotic tourist.

“No. Not twenty. Fifty!” The driver was furious.

“No. Twenty!” I shook the bank note in my fist, but the driver was adamant.

“Fifty. Sidi Bishr long way.” He gestured with his hand, a furious, repetitive wave to indicate the distance.

“No. I have no more pounds. Only twenty.”

“Dollars?” The driver grew angry. He pointed and waved and cursed the day I was born.

I have no doubt that Egyptian drivers earn their money, but, after weeks of negotiating fares and dodging drivers, my sympathy dissolved.

“No. No dollars. Pounds. The banks are closed. I have no money. Ramadan!”

Mine was a bold face, capital B, big, fat lie. I had a wallet full of pounds and euro, but refused to share any more of them. Teresa cocked her head with surprise, but stayed quiet. The driver crashed his fist against the dashboard.

“No. Sidi Bishr… you…. you… no…!” He cursed at me, in Arabic, for several minutes.

“Stop! Stop the taxi. Stop here,” I shouted.

“No, too far,” the driver said. “How you go no money?”

“We’ll walk!” I shouted.

“No. Far. Far.” The driver accelerated and weaved between cars. “You pay me tomorrow?”

“No. The banks are closed. We have no money. Ramadan!”

We flew along the Corniche and arrived at the hotel in record time. Imad would have been impressed. The hotel’s security guards inspected the taxi and slowly lowered the security bollards. Those last few moments were especially awkward. The driver pulled forward and Teresa leapt from the taxi. I paid, with my twenty-pound note, and added a sincere “Inshallah!”



⁂



The next morning we found the Big Red Bus on a corner, not far from the hotel. I wanted to ask the driver about the bus, the schedule, and the route. I wanted to know why the bus disappeared, the night before, and stranded us on that awful road. I wanted answers, but Teresa told me to let it go. Instead, we took our seats and enjoyed the view on our way to Montazah. Teresa had read about a palace there, with a public garden and view of the sea. There would be a restaurant and a beach and no cars, she read. It would be everything that Ras El Tin was not.

The bus set down on a busy corner of the Corniche across the way from a large gatehouse that resembled a medieval castle; it even had turrets. A sign informed us that we were about to enter the Al Montazah Palace Area, a public park that was once a luxurious estate for Egypt’s elite classes. While we stopped to take a few photos, a taxi pulled alongside. “The park is closed,” the driver cried. “Come, I will take you.” Where he wanted us to go, I can only guess, but the park was, in fact, very much open. We paid a small entry fee – a few pound each – and soon found ourselves on a wide, paved road guarded by neat columns of palms. A roadside map illustrated the sprawling complex of buildings and beaches and gardens that lay ahead. We counted two palaces, a mosque, and a hotel… then another taxi driver rolled to a stop and shouted to us. “More to see, come with me,” he said, but, at that moment, we just wanted to enjoy a quiet stroll through the estate. “La, shokrun. No, thank you,” I said. We turned off the main road and found a footpath tucked under a towering canopy of exotic trees that hid the sun from view. The temperature dropped a few degrees and the air felt fresh, like that of a warm spring morning.

The palace grounds were immaculate. Gardeners quietly poured over the lawns like forensic scientists – they left neither stone nor flowerbed unturned. Theirs was a work of magic, a relentless quest to keep the desert at bay. Not so long ago, these grounds were a desolate and rocky bluff surrounded by little more than sand and sea. The secluded location was nearer the remote villages of Canopus and Abu Qir than Alexandria. In 1801, Muhammad Ali, the Ottoman wali, landed at Abu Qir and forced Napoleon’s armies from Egypt. He established a small fort here, with a handful of soldiers and a few cannons. The fort quickly faded from memory, till only the rusted cannons remained. One night, in 1892, Ali’s great-great grandson, Abbas Hemli II, stumbled across the bluff and the rusted cannons. The khedive – then eighteen years old – adored the solitude and bought the surrounding land. He commissioned a summer palace, Salamlek, which would also serve as his private hunting lodge and, later, as the residence for his second wife. Abbas added luxurious gardens and imported trees and flowers and game animals till, quite suddenly, that rocky bluff resembled the elaborate gardens he had seen on his travels across Europe. In 1932, King Faoud I added a second, larger palace, Al Haramlek, but after the 1952 Revolution, the estate was nationalized and converted to the public park we strolled that day.

A sign directed us toward Salamlek. The old palace, which served as a field hospital during the First World War, has since been converted to a luxurious hotel and casino. Tour guides boast that the hotel has twenty luxurious rooms and five spacious suites all of which overlook a private beach and garden. It would have made a fine stop that morning – Teresa suggested they might have a tearoom – but somewhere along the way, we missed a turn. Instead, we soon found ourselves at Haramlek, which not even we could have missed. The palace lords over the park from its perch on a low hill near the sea. Its architecture borrows from several popular styles from around the Mediterranean: Florentine, Moorish, and Ottoman, among others. The palace has three main floors, each fronted by a dramatic ramada. Two towers buttress the main building – one rises five stories, the other seven – and the grounds are lined with footpaths set amid ornamental flowers and shrubs. A high, wrought-iron fence keeps hapless tourists at bay, but allows a fantastic view.

From Haramlek, we marched to the sea where we found a row of beachfront villas. We looked for an entry to the water, but a guard chased us away. We scuttled up the hill, away from trouble. By then, we were ready to eat, but the cafes were shuttered. A sign on one door simply read: Ramadan Clost. Montazah was beautiful, but its facilities were closed for the month-long holiday. We retreated to the city.

Teresa suggested we visit the Bibliotheca Alexandrina on our way back to town. Of all the sights in Alexandria, the library was the one we agreed not to miss. The old Library of Alexandria, founded sometime in the third century BC, housed the largest collection of written works ever assembled in antiquity. The library was part of a larger complex, the Mouseion, which attracted scholars and learned travelers from all corners of the known world. Its collection was lost, sometime around the first century BC, though its final demise remains unresolved. The old library stood on the corner of the Canopic Way and the Street of the Soma, a few blocks from the Eastern Harbour, and its proximity to the sea may have led to its destruction. Plutarch, the Greco-Roman biographer, wrote that, during the Battle of Alexandria, Julius Caesar set “fire to his own ships, which, after burning the docks, thence spread on and destroyed the great library.” Other sources insist the library survived, in a smaller form, until the third or fourth century, when it was destroyed by another fire or an earthquake or its works were plundered by invaders or destroyed by anti-pagan zealots. In any case, the world’s most famous library is long gone, and with it, an unimaginable body of literature and scholarship.

We set down on the Corniche, near a busy intersection in Shatby, a small neighborhood up the coast from Midan Rimla. The driver insisted the library was just across the street. “Go. Yes, go,” he said with a smile and wave.

The new library opened in 2002, on a large parcel of land between Alexandria University and the Corniche. A few years later, during the 2011 protests, looters invaded many of Egypt’s historic sites and public buildings. Hundreds of university students gathered at the library. They formed a volunteer guard to protect the building and its collections. They succeeded, but the site remained a high-profile target in the years that followed. The protests continued, along with a string of bombings around Alexandria, and the government erected an impenetrable security barricade around the library complex. Now its grand view of the sea is lost behind a wall of reinforced steel seven feet tall. So the library was there, just as the driver promised, but it was unexpectedly difficult to find.

After a short walk, we found an entrance guarded by a squadron of soldiers. The young men leaned against the barricade, with their arms folded across their chests, and their weapons slumped softly over their shoulders. They ignored us, and we them. A short flight of stairs carried us to a broad courtyard surrounded by reflecting pools in front of the library. The courtyard was especially busy. Young men and women strolled to and fro, while others chatted into their phones or sat in the shade to read. A guard shouted to us. “Closed. Ramadan. Tomorrow.” We could not tour any of the reading rooms, or any of the four museums, or the planetarium, nor could we stroll through the stacks to admire the million or so volumes on hand, nor could we admire the exhibits or join a lecture group or watch a film screening.

Teresa hung her head. “Maybe we’ll come back someday.”

The courtyard led to a small road, alongside the university campus. The sidewalks were clean and quiet, so we decided to go for a walk.

Teresa pointed to a little map in our guidebook. “There’s a Jewish cemetery over there,” she said. “Do you want to see it?”

I thought back to the sign we saw at Montazah. “Ramadan. Clost,” I said with a sigh.

“We could walk over to the national museum, it might be open later,” she suggested.

“Ramadan. Clost.”

“Let’s walk to Midan Ramla. We’ll find lunch somewhere.”

“Ramadan. Clost.”

“Oh, hush!”

After a few blocks, we found a set of tram tracks. Teresa suggested we take the tram into town, and I agreed. We stood on the platform, alone, and waited awhile. A man walked casually down the middle of the tracks, toward Midan Rimla. He held his hands in his pockets and whistled under his breath while he walked.

“There goes our train,” I joked.

“Let’s walk to the next station,” Teresa said.

The tracks rolled along an avenue tucked between old apartment blocks, like a river through a deep canyon. It was mid-afternoon and the city was half-asleep. Cars lined the curb, but traffic was light. Pedestrians filled the sidewalks, but kept to themselves. Even the taxi drivers ignored us. We were just a few blocks from the Corniche, but it felt like a different city, a different world. We enjoyed our peaceful walk along the avenue, and, a few minutes later, we found another platform.

I don’t remember how long we waited on the platform, but we had time enough to look around and to read the route map posted by the platform. One side was printed in Arabic, the other in English, but someone had ripped that side to shreds. Eventually, a faded-yellow tram rolled to a stop in front of us. Alexandria’s tram system dates back to 1863. It’s the oldest tram system in Africa, and one of the oldest in the world, and it looks every bit its age. The car was outdated and patched together; the lights flickered, and there was no hint of air-conditioning, all of the windows were wide open. The car had very few seats, and those few seats were all taken – by men. Unlike Cairo, nobody offered a seat to Teresa, so we stood in a vestibule, on the stairs. A conductor collected our fare: twenty-five piastre – about four cents each. A moment later, the tram jolted to a start, and we rolled along the avenue, just for a minute or so, before the tram stopped again. The other passengers climbed off the car and disappeared into the streets while the tram choked and sputtered to a deep sleep. We had traveled a few hundred feet and would have to walk the rest of the way.

We wound our way around a few blocks and stuck our noses in a few windows. Our guidebook insisted we try Mohammed Ahmed – a falafel joint – but it looked closed. The shop was completely dark. They seemed to have lost power. In fact, the whole neighborhood had lost power.

“I guess that’s why the tram stopped where it did,” I suggested.

“Yeah, I guess so. Where do you want to eat?” Teresa asked.

I noticed a few gas-powered generators on the sidewalk. Some shops had their own power, we just had to follow the exhaust. Near Saad Zaghloul, we spotted a busy storefront, a few doors down from Taverna. The sign read El Saidy Patsserie, and a crowd gathered outside its doors.

El Saidy, we should have realized, is a bakery. They don’t sell sandwiches or pizza or coffees or any of those bloated menu items you might find in an American bakery. Instead, they sell pastries, and they sell a lot of them, especially during Ramadan. The shop was dressed in elegant marbles and dark wood, and crystal chandeliers hung from the ceiling. The display cases were filled with trays of pies and pastries and puddings. The counters were piled high with sheet cakes and fruitcakes and candied cakes.

The bakery was so busy that we could barely reach the counter, and when we did, we had no idea what to order, or how. We stood there, with our mouths open, like helpless children. A manager took us aside and offered to help. He spoke English, but even then, I only understood half of what he said. He pointed at the display cases and recited a long list of items – kanafeh, zalabieh, qatayef, basboussa – none of which sounded familiar, but all of which looked incredible. Everything was stuffed with crème or drizzled in honeys or dipped in syrups or rolled in crushed nuts. The manager suggested we try a few pieces. He shouted to a clerk, and a minute later, he presented us with a tray of sweet pastries in all shapes and sizes. I recognized only the baklava, but another desert looked like a cannolo made of shredded wheat, it was filled with a sweet and nutty crème. Teresa enjoyed a slice of cake that looked a bit like bread pudding topped with peach wedges. It was all wonderful. We asked for a bit of each – everything was sold by the kilo – and the manager shouted our order across the shop. A moment later, he presented four heavy boxes and an order slip, scribbled in Arabic.

I stood off to the side and waited while Teresa stood in line to pay. She reached the cashier soon enough, but he ignored her. Instead, he called the next customer, and the next. Teresa stood there, dejected and confused. In our sugar-induced stupor, we hadn’t noticed there were two lines, and the lines were segregated by gender, for Ramadan. Teresa unwittingly queued in the men’s line, and the cashier was unable to help her. The cashier waved to me, asked for the order slip, and rang the sale. I don’t remember what we paid, but it was only a dollar or two.

Teresa wanted to see more of the city, away from the Corniche, so I suggested we take another tram across town. We found a system map at a nearby station, and it showed a line that terminated at El Nasr (the old Victoria Station) not far from Sidi Bishr. Victoria was once a royal palace – Saray al-Ramleh – surrounded by little more than palm groves and the dunes for which the palace was named. The groves and dunes are long gone, but the palace remains, albeit twice renamed, and long-since converted to a train station. Teresa thumbed through our guidebook and found Victoria on a map. It seemed to be a mile or so from our hotel.

It was late afternoon and the tram was busy, but bearable. We stood in a vestibule near an open window, next to a group of teenage boys who joked and laughed among themselves the whole way. The train moved slowly, in fits and starts, which gave us time to inspect the neighborhood. The roads, by then, were jammed with traffic, and the sidewalks were busy, too. Vendors crowded the platforms at some of the busier stations. I counted a few bookstalls and clothiers among them. We traveled several miles, and then the tram slowed and ground its wheels as we rounded a bend. Suddenly, the tram stopped. We waited there, unmoving, for several minutes. The tram was not yet in a station – nobody moved. In time, a few restless passengers slipped off the train, through the open doors. As time wore on, more and more passengers climbed down. They marched in ones and twos along a dirt path between the track and a stone wall. We jumped off the tram and followed the line to a busy square. We couldn’t tell where we were, and our map was of no use. We never found Victoria Station, but, after a few wrong turns, we did find the Corniche and our hotel.

That night, we showered and napped and tore through our pastries with more enthusiasm than I would like to admit. The sweets were wonderful and fresh and light; it was the best food we had eaten in days. Later, Teresa said she wanted to dip her toes in the sea one more time, before we returned to Cairo the next morning. Our guidebook strongly recommended a beach near the Stanley Bridge, a famous, albeit modern, landmark a few miles down the road. We found a taxi near the hotel and negotiated a fare, but the driver misunderstood our destination, and dropped us, instead, at the Four Seasons, a towering and luxurious hotel a mile or so from the bridge and the beach.

The Four Seasons was jammed – cars and taxis filled the driveway and blocked the surrounding roads. Young men and women mobbed the sidewalks like well-dressed gangs. I thought there might be a party at the hotel. Curious, we followed the crowd around a corner where we found a large, ultramodern mall that filled the lower floors, under the hotel. The city had fasted and slept the day away, and now it was time for the young and hip to celebrate. The clubs open late, at one in the morning, but the popular crowd would arrive at three, and the music would play till sunrise. The prostitutes and billiard halls may be gone, but la belle époque lives on in the discos and shisha lounges and afwas of Alexandria. They would be jammed till all hours. Outclassed, outdressed, and outnumbered, we skipped the hotel, and the mall. Instead, we crossed the Corniche and strolled along the shore, back toward our hotel. The weather was beautiful – cool and dry – but the streets and sidewalks were busy, too busy to enjoy. We surrendered the city to the younger generation and went to bed.

In the morning, we took the Big Red Bus back to town, back to Midan Ramla, on our way to Mahattat Misr, the central train station. There we would board a train to Cairo, for the last leg of our trip. I thought, again, of Michael Palin, who made the same trip, with a film crew, back in 1991. In the BBC film, Palin adored the “handsome station,” until he tried to buy his ticket to Cairo. He switched from queue to queue, but the ticket agents were reluctant to sell a ticket to him. “No one seems to have heard of Cairo,” he complained. “It’s only the capital for Heaven’s sake.” I knew the feeling – we had suffered the same trouble all over Egypt.

We walked from the Corniche to the train station, about a mile away. Teresa hoped to see a few more sites that morning, but there was nothing of interest along the way. We found the station easily enough, and, by my estimate, it had not changed one bit since Palin’s trip, decades earlier. Its façade bore a vaguely Victorian style – a portico and clock towers stood over the main entrance – but I could only guess its age. The station and its trains might well date back to the 1850s, when the first train in Egypt – and Africa – ran from here to Cairo. We pushed through a crowd of passengers and found our way inside. The ticket office was busy, but the line moved quickly.

“Hello. Two tickets for the next train to Cairo, please,” I said cheerfully.

“Train closed. Last train to Cairo, one hour,” the agent said.

“Last train to Cairo? No, please, the next train to Cairo. Twelve o’clock,” I pleaded.

“Train. Cairo. Closed. Last train, one hour.” The agent spoke slowly and accentuated each syllable, as though I didn’t speak English very well. He raised his index finger to illustrate the number one.

Teresa interrupted. “I think he means the train is full, and the next train is in one hour.” She pointed to a schedule board near the tracks.

“Yes, please. Last train to Cairo. Two tickets, please,” I said.

An hour later, the loudspeaker crackled to life. The announcer rattled off a list of stations, in Arabic, then English, the last of which would be Cairo. The train was full, but quiet, and we left only a few minutes behind schedule.

“This is quite nice,” Teresa observed. “Why’d we ever take the bus to Alexandria? We should have taken the train up from Cairo.”

I reminded her how much trouble we had getting train tickets before.

“Well, next time we should take the train. It’s much nicer, don’t you think?”

“I do,” I said.

Teresa stared through the window for the next two hours. She admired the river and the delta and all those quaint villages and pleasure boats and children splashing in the river that she had hoped to see on the bus ride a couple days earlier, but didn’t.

“I might write a book about our trip,” I said.

“Oh, that’s fun,” she said. “What would you call it?”

“Last Train to Cairo. I just like the way it sounds, don’t you?”

“Yes, yes I do.”





Farewell Egypt





From Cairo, we took the subway to Dokki, that posh quarter in Giza we explored a few weeks earlier. We would spend the next two nights – our last in Egypt – at the Safir, an upscale hotel surrounded by tree-lined avenues and a quiet park. Our room overlooked the pool; the water sparkled in the evening sun, and rows of lounge chairs decorated the lonely patio. Excepting a few stubborn foreigners, like ourselves, the hotel was vacant. I scanned the horizon for signs of life, but found none. I spied on the balconies across the way. The apartments were dark, their curtains drawn. Many, if not most, of the residents had deserted the city for the weekend. Some thousands made their way north, to the beachfront resorts and luxury hotels overlooking the Mediterranean, and as we settled into our room at the Safir, some travelers from Dokki were probably settling into our old room at the Hilton Alexandria. With any luck, and better air-conditioning, they would enjoy the city by the sea more than I had.

That evening, we strolled the blocks around the hotel and found a swanky gift shop on the second floor of a commercial building. The shop was bright and cheery, its shelves lined with elegant dresses and pillows and tapestries in reds and greens and all shades of white. Another room displayed pottery and glassware, each handcrafted by local artisans, the clerk boasted. Yet another room exhibited fine art; its paintings and sculptures would suffice any fan of the Met. I studied the price tags on a few pieces, converted pounds to dollars and back again, and snorted. The asking price for most pieces reflected a lifestyle that I have yet to achieve. Embarrassed, I redirected my search to the lower bins, where those of us in worn sneakers and frayed jeans would feel more comfortable. Ever the pragmatist, I selected a set of affordable cotton towels, woven from fine Egyptian cotton, by an Egyptian tailor, the tag promised in bold lettering. Teresa, being less pragmatic, chose a few scarves and a heavy, polished stone monolith that looked a bit like a very over-sized candy dish. I wanted to complain – like most monoliths, this thing was impractical in every way – but I was too late. Teresa asked the clerk about its make and model and pedigree, but the questions were just for show – the sale was made as soon as Teresa saw the thing. A moment later, the clerk bound the monolith in sheets of wafer-thin wrapping paper, tied the whole lot with a silk bow, and lowered it into a pretty paper bag.

On our way back to the hotel, monolith in tow, we walked by Semsema, the shawarma restaurant we had enjoyed on our first tour of Dokki. Our mouths watered at the memory, but the place was shuttered tightly, the curbside spits gone, the sweet aroma of grilled meats faded to memory, and the walls stripped bare to the studs. Teresa sighed. Egypt had had enough of us.

The next day – a Friday – we walked across Giza, from Dokki to Mohandessein, a ritzy neighborhood known for its shops, condos, and not much else. The streets were empty, and the shops closed for the day. I tried to admire the tree-lined streets and broad sidewalks, but the scene felt too familiar, too staged, too suburban. Frustrated and bored of our walk, I flagged a passing taxi. As we settled into our seats, Abdel, the driver, turned off his stereo and treated us to his ethnography of the city. His father sent him to university, where he earned a degree, in what I cannot remember, but he made more money driving a taxi, he explained. Years ago, when Abdel was very young, his family tended a plot of land not far from the corner where he found us. That was before Nasser dammed the river and the fields turned to dust, Abdel told us. He rubbed his fingers together and threw an imaginary pinch of dust to the wind. There was a time, he continued, when all of Giza – from the Nile to the pyramids – would flood every year: farmland one day, an ocean the next. He waved his hand over the dashboard to illustrate the annual floods. In wet years, the water would spread across the valley and swallow the Sphinx and the pyramids till there was nothing left to see, he declared. Abdel laced his stories with a healthy share of hyperbole, but his point was well taken. Within his lifetime, concrete and steel swallowed a way of life that pre-dated Egypt itself. The farms live on, all over Giza, but you can’t see them from the street, you have to look.

“Did you see pyramids?” Abdel asked.

“Yes, a few weeks ago,” I answered.

He shook off my defenses. “No, not those pyramids. Those pyramids are baby. Did you go Saqqara?”

We had not, but I had read about Saqqara years earlier, when I studied archaeology as an undergrad. Saqqara is a massive archaeological site, home to several large and prominent step pyramids (the pyramid of Djoser, the Red pyramid, and the Bent pyramid). Like many of the most famous sites around Egypt, Saqqara is a necropolis dotted with tombs and monuments to the dead. The site fills a broad plain on the left bank of the Nile about twenty miles upriver from Cairo. Our guidebook recommended a visit, but suggested that travelers devote a whole day to the site. There were few services at Saqqara, our guidebook warned – bring sunscreen and pack a box lunch.

“I can take you, not far,” Abdel promised. “We go now.”

“Sorry, no, we don’t have time.” I tried to change the subject. “How long have you been driving a taxi?”

“No time? Why? Where you go next? Airport?” Abdel smiled.

“No, I’m sorry. We are meeting a friend at the hotel. Is it much further?” I raised my arm and tapped my wrist.

“Later. Later Saqqara. I take you,” Abdel insisted.

I looked at Teresa and mouthed Saqqara? but she just shrugged. “No. I don’t think so. The heat, you know. It’s summer. Ramadan.”

“Of course, too far. Saqqara is hot and far – you would not like it very much. The pyramids are old and fall down. But Giza pyramids easy, even for you. I meet you after noon. In the hotel.”

I looked at Teresa and mouthed Giza? but she just shrugged again. I was torn. We wanted to do something, but weren’t ready to commit to anything in particular.

“Oh, no, I don’t think so. We need to sleep and pack for the trip home. We’re leaving in the morning, and we already saw the pyramids.”

“Of course, my friend. I see you later. In the lobby.”

For the next two hours we readied ourselves for the trip back to Boston. Flights? Confirmed. Laundry? Washed. Souvenirs? Purchased. Bags? Packed. We then had nothing left to do but relax. Teresa sank into a chair by the window and read a book – what she read I can’t remember. I skimmed our guidebook and wondered how we should end our trip to Egypt. I suggested we find a cricket match somewhere – not that I knew anything about cricket, but it sounded fun. Of course, there were no cricket games to find – being a Friday and being Ramadan. Teresa said something about coffee and one last walk along the Nile.

By then we had forgotten about Abdel, but there he was, in the lobby, waiting for us. He slouched in a chair, a baseball cap tucked over his eyes. He might have been sound asleep, but somehow he saw us coming. “My friends! Good to see you. Did you have lunch? My taxi ready. The air cold.” Abdel jogged to the door and held it open for us. As promised, his taxi was out front, and the air inside was cool, if not exactly cold.

Abdel seemed not to have noticed that we had disappeared to our room for a couple hours, or, if he had noticed, he certainly did not mind. Instead, he continued his tour of Giza as though we had never stopped at the hotel at all. We drove by the botanical gardens and he recited a short list of its flora (none of which I remember). We drove by the zoo and he rattled off a roster of its residents (all the usual suspects). We drove by the university and he recited a list of celebrated alumni (he was especially fond of Omar Sharif). We turned next to Al Ahram – an arrow-straight boulevard that cuts across Giza all the way to the pyramids. Abdel told us more about the old days – before he was born. There was a tram, he said, that ran all the way from the river to the pyramids, right down the middle of the road, between the fields. Imagine that, he said with a laugh. Abdel couldn’t remember when they removed the trams or the tracks, but he wished they would bring them back. “Trains are good for the people. Not cars. Not traffic,” he explained.

While Abdel spoke, I wondered whether this were the same road we traveled on our first night in Egypt, when we rode from the airport to Mena House. That night, traffic and pedestrians filled the streets, horns honked, engines roared, and I was all but certain that a month in Egypt would kill us both. But, as we crossed Giza that Friday afternoon, our last day in Egypt, we had the city to ourselves. The storefronts were shuttered, the sidewalk cafes closed, the cars, trucks, and buses nowhere to be found. If ever there were an apocalypse, it would look like this, I thought. While I stared out the window in disbelief, Abdel continued his tour. I missed much of what he said, but I remember that he recommended a restaurant that we could try later. “Here, my friend,” he said as he pointed to a McDonald’s, “tonight, dinner, I take you, the best sandwich in all Egypt.”

All along the way, I noticed long rows of trash piled on the curb. The berms spilled over the pavement, and, at one point, the road tapered to a narrow, sinuous lane. Abdel slowed the car to weave through the festering debris, and, just then, a mob swarmed the taxi from all sides. There were seven or eight men, all dressed in grey djellabas. They appeared, suddenly and improbably, from behind the mounds of garbage. One man leaned through Abdel’s window and grabbed at his arms. Another tried to open the passenger door; he fumbled with the handle but couldn’t release the lock. The others pulled at our doors, but they, too, were locked, and our windows closed tight. Abdel shouted and swung his arms through his window. He accelerated quickly and drove the wrong way down a side street. When we were safely away, I asked Abdel what the men wanted, but he said they were just crazy. His voice trembled while he spoke.

Minutes later, Abdel stopped on a side road near the Sphinx, not far from the “papyrus museum” we begrudgingly visited with Sayid on our first visit to the pyramids. Teresa groaned and insisted that Abdel bring us to the main entrance.

“No, please, the pyramids. See, the Sphinx?” Abdel cried. “This way, no traffic. Very easy to find you. We meet here. How long you want?”

I squeezed Teresa’s hand and leaned forward. “Last time, we had a bad guide,” I explained. “He lied to us and took us to a papyrus museum.”

“No, my friend. Please. No museum. They sell essence, they lie, for money. Don’t be angry. They are businessmen, but no business. They are hungry. Their family is hungry.” He held a hand over his mouth and showed that it was empty.

I liked Abdel. I especially liked his enthusiasm for his job, his city, and us – his clients, but I especially appreciated his bare honesty.

“OK, but we don’t know how long we need. Maybe an hour, two hours? We can’t ask you to wait for us.”

“My friend. Look,” Abdel pointed left and right. The streets were empty; some of the shopkeepers slept in chairs in front of their stores. “I have nowhere to go. I wait.”

Abdel had made his point – he was a businessman, but there was no business.

“OK,” I said. “We’ll see you here, in two hours.”

We bought tickets at a booth near the entrance, and passed through the security checkpoint. There were no lines or tourists, just a few exhausted guards and the obligatory guide. He demanded to see our tickets, but Teresa waved him away. With Teresa in charge, we marched up the sloping path toward the Sphinx, past rows of empty tables where, weeks earlier, we browsed displays of imported souvenirs. A watchman followed us, for our protection, he insisted, but we ignored his pitch. He eventually surrendered to the heat. He cursed at us and slumped back to the Sphinx. Two boys trotted by on a horse. One boy halfheartedly offered a ride, but couldn’t be bothered to wait for an answer. None of that mattered. Teresa wanted to stroll among the pyramids, alone.

We hiked across the plateau, past the pyramids, and climbed a low hill. To our left, a few hundred feet away, I saw a crowd of men and boys surrounded by camels. The men leaned back in their chairs while the boys ran in circles around them. The camels lay on the sand and stared off into the distance, oblivious to everyone and everything. Camels seem not to care about pyramids at all, I joked. Teresa ignored me. She turned on her heels and gazed past me. This was the view that she had wanted to find on our first trip to the pyramids. From here, the pyramids formed a neat row, their colossal silhouettes brush over the horizon. On that first visit, a month earlier, Sayid had rushed us along, and scolded us for dawdling. This time, it was just us. There would be no guides, no watchmen, and no tourists to crowd Teresa’s view.

“Take my picture. Make sure to line up the pyramids just right. Don’t mess it up,” Teresa said as she pressed the camera into my hands. She is fairly good-natured, so, on those rare occasions when she’s not, I acquiesce quickly and silently. Teresa strolled down the slope, toward the pyramids, to find the perfect backdrop for her portrait. I put the camera to my eye, and followed her through the viewfinder. For a moment, she disappeared behind a hill of yellow earth, and I struggled to find her again.

“Sir, she doesn’t have to make there. She can make in the center.” The voice startled me. “The loo is at the visitor center.”

A man stood at my side. He was about my height, but gaunt; his cheeks stretched tightly across his jaws. He wore khakis and a light-colored, button-up shirt. His sleeves, unbuttoned, flapped in the breeze.

“I’m sorry?” I said with surprise.

“Your lady,” he said while pointing toward Teresa, “she can make at the visitor center. There is a loo for the lady.”

“Oh, thank you, no, she is going to pose for a photograph,” I said.

As Teresa emerged from behind the low hill, I snapped a few photos, and just about lined up the pyramids in a row, as demanded. Satisfied, Teresa explored the hills above the plateau while my new friend and I enjoyed a casual conversation. He was a father, he said, of three girls. The youngest just entered university, and his eldest two daughters had children. He was a proud grandfather and he carried photos of the young families in his wallet. I asked why he was at the pyramids that day, and he held up a canvas saddlebag filled with knick-knacks. He was a teacher, he said, but, during the summer, he sold souvenirs to tourists, to raise money for his grandchildren. He wondered where I was from, and he asked about the schools and the universities around Boston. He had heard of Harvard University, but knew only that it was in America, which, for most of us, is all one really needs to know about it. I asked him about Giza, and the schools and universities there. I told him that we tried to tour Cairo University, but the campus was closed.

“Yes. No. The people protest and police shoot the people, no good,” he said with a heavy sigh. “We have many good students, but no jobs. Our country is very young, very smart. We have hope, but no jobs. We cannot eat hope.”

I saw Teresa in the distance, on her private stroll around the plateau, not far from one of the pyramids. We waved to each other, but she wanted to be alone, to explore the necropolis at will.

My new friend wondered if I traveled a lot, to other countries. I mentioned a few trips overseas, but worried that I was bragging. He just laughed and called me Odysseus. “Have you read Homer?” he asked.

“A little bit,” I said sheepishly.

I remembered a few details from The Odyssey, but I had only read the abridged version in high school lit. My friend, on the other hand, might well have been a Homeric scholar. He recounted all the players and places. He knew all the names in Arabic, he said, but had trouble discussing the story in English. He told me that Odysseus traveled the sea for ten years, from Turkey and Greece to Egypt and Italy and back again. The gods would not let him go home, he said. They tempted him with song, they broke his ships, and they killed his men.

“I have never left Egypt,” he said. “Only in books.” He pointed at his temple and smiled.

We talked next about Ramadan, about camels, about the weather. When we ran out of topics, he tempted me with a few trinkets from his bag: a plastic pyramid marked Made in China; a string of polished stones, their facets stamped N-E-F-R-E-T-I-T-I in dull white lettering; and an illustrated guide to Egypt, its cover promised to educate readers in six “langauges”. While he delivered his pitch, I recalled the swanky gift shop from the night before. I remembered how I felt there, dressed like a hobo and surrounded by goods I could never afford. Then I thought about our trip in general, and how much we spent on hotels with buffet breakfasts and crisp white sheets and welcome cups of karkadé. And I thought about our tours and museum tickets and private taxis. And I thought about the hantour drivers in Luxor, and the tissue sellers in Cairo, and the dogs in Abu Simbel, and the cats in Alexandria. And I thought about the gentleman merchant standing there with me on the plateau by the pyramids, his saddlebag filled with baubles that I could afford but would never want. Guilt curdled in my stomach while shame filled my throat.

“No, please, maybe a few postcards,” I pleaded. “I have no room in my bag for gifts.”

“Yes, of course, postcards are very nice, see.” He pulled an envelope from his bag. It was full of postcards, their colors gaudy, their corners bent.

“Ah,” I said reluctantly, “how much for ten postcards?”

“Sir, whatever you like. I am happy for one pound or a hundred!”

He squeezed my elbow and laughed at his joke while I pulled a stack of Egyptian notes from my wallet. As promised, the price was unimportant: he accepted the notes without counting them.

Teresa waved to me from her perch down the hill. It was time to go. I thanked my friend for his company and wished him well. “Sayonara,” he said. “That is Japanese for bon voyage.”

Teresa and I strolled around the pyramids for another hour, and the plateau gathered a few more travelers as the afternoon wore on. The Great Pyramid was especially popular. A dozen children and teenagers scampered up the stones while their chaperones shouted at them to adopt oddly particular poses. I wondered whether they were forming letters with their limbs, but I didn’t recognize their alphabet. While they posed, ever so precipitously, on their stone ledges, Teresa climbed a half-dozen courses of the Great Pyramid. She peered into a dark cavern scored, centuries earlier, into the limestone cliff. A dark-haired man in blue jeans and T-shirt met her there, but I couldn’t tell what they talked about. A few minutes later, she sidled to the ground.

“Did you have fun?” I asked.

“Mmm hmmm.” Teresa was excited, but exhausted; her face streaked with sweat.

“What did the guy want?”

“Oh, he was telling me about the pyramid. He said I could go in the tunnel too, but it was too hot.”

It was too hot, and a soft breeze launched clouds of dust in the air till we choked. Time to go. We crossed the plateau slowly and gingerly. We slowed near the boat pits, we inspected the quarries and the rubble, we strolled past the Western Cemetery, and we paused by the tomb where Sayid tried to illustrate reincarnation to us on that first visit. Seven thousand years ago, you die, you come back. We circled the pyramids for good measure, wandered down the barren road where the watchman had taunted us, we waved goodbye to the Sphinx, and we passed through the security checkpoint for the last time.

Abdel was waiting for us. “My friends! Where you go next?”

Where you go next? That familiar pitch followed us from Cairo to Luxor to Aswan to Hurghada and Alexandria and back again. Where you go next? It was our last evening in Egypt, we had gone everywhere we could go, we had seen everything we could see. Where you go next? We go to America, we go to Boston, we go home. Where you go next?

“To the hotel, please. We go to the hotel.”

At the Safir, we showered and changed, and we unpacked and re-packed our clothes and computers and books and toiletries and souvenirs. I wondered whether my bag would survive another flight: the straps caught on the zippers, and the drawstrings wrestled with the pockets. Teresa stitched a couple loose seams and wished me luck. I wondered whether I should jettison my sun-faded T-shirts and threadbare socks, but the bag held, just barely. Teresa’s backpack fared a little better; it was something like a clown car. Her bag could hold anything and everything she threw at it, and if it didn’t fit in the bag, she buckled it to the front, sides, or top. When she finally strapped the bag to her back she looked a bit like a department store sale rack, but she didn’t care.

Teresa wanted to go for an evening stroll, and I hoped to find a post office where I could mail the postcards I bought that afternoon. Ramadan, Teresa reminded me, they’ll all be closed. We stopped by the front desk to ask for stamps, and the clerk suggested we try the gift shop in the lobby. The shop was closed, its door locked, but a man sitting behind the counter let us in anyway.

“Stamps, no sorry. And the post office will be closed,” the clerk said. He looked at our tattered clothes and sunburnt faces. “How long have you been here?” he asked with an eyebrow raised.

We told him about our trip, the places we had been, and the people we had met.

“It must have been very difficult,” he said. “To travel now is very difficult. Five or ten years ago, everybody came to Egypt. We had people from every country, every city, but now, not so much…” His voice lowered to a whisper. “Maybe, in a few years, you come back, and you will see. I hope you come back. It will be much better then.”

We shook hands, and I thanked him for his time. As we walked across the lobby, the clerk shouted to us.

“How many postcards do you have?”

“Five,” I said.

“Give them to me, I will post them for you,” he said.

“Shokrun, shokrun,” I said. “How much do I owe you?”

“Only the postage, I think a few pound each.”

I held out a fifty-pound note, and told him to keep the change.

“No, please, I do not keep your money. Only for the stamps. I do not want baksheesh.”

I insisted that he keep the change, but he refused.

“No, I want to help. I want to do this for you. I want to show you that we are good people.” The clerk checked his pockets and found a ten-pound note. “Here, your change. I will post your cards in a few days. You will get them soon. Inshallah!” (The postcards arrived, as promised, a few weeks later.)

The next morning, Abdel met us in the lobby. His taxi was parked out front, the trunk open, and the air cool as always. It was about six o’clock, but the city had slept in that morning. They must be recovering from last night’s suhoor, I thought. On our way to the airport, we passed the Cairo Tower, and we remembered that afternoon when its speakers erupted overhead, while we sat, stuck in traffic, in its shadow. We passed the Novotel, and we recalled the wedding party under our window our first night there; I liked the twirling dancers, Teresa liked the fireworks. We crossed the Nile, for the last time, and we recounted our walks along the Corniche, in Cairo, in Luxor, and Aswan. We passed the Ramses Hilton and we remembered the chaos outside our window those first few days; we thought we’d never survive the city. I pointed toward the Egyptian Museum; Teresa wished that we had gone back. “Next time,” I said, “save something for next time.” We passed Ramses Station and the Harmony Jet office, where we had boarded the bus to Luxor one day. I wondered if Hamady were there already, a cigarette stuck to his lip, a stack of bus tickets in hand. Suddenly we were on a highway, the city safely tucked below us. Abdel accelerated quickly. Teresa wondered if we were going the right way. “Where is all the traffic?” she asked. There was none.

We reached the airport in about twenty minutes, and, for once, the ride was much too quick. I wanted to go back and do it again. I wasn’t ready to leave Egypt, but it was too late. Abdel parked in front of the terminal and opened our doors and the trunk. “British Airways,” he said. We didn’t recognize the terminal. Its façade glowed pink in the morning sun; panels of plate glass reflected the morning light. I paid the fare and added a healthy tip. “For your family,” I told Abdel. He shook my hand, bowed to Teresa, and jumped back in his taxi. I watched as he sped away from the airport. Where you go next, Abdel? Where you go next?

We entered the terminal and followed the signs to a check-in gate. Teresa remarked that the airport looked lovely in the daylight. I joked that they must have built it over the last few weeks; I doubted it were the same terminal we had seen that first night. The polished floors squeaked under our feet, and I wondered if anyone could see the tear in my jeans. Most of the shops were closed, but we browsed window displays filled with luxury sunglasses, jewelry, hats, luggage, and guidebooks.

A sign directed us to the British Airways desk, but we had to pass through a round of security inspections before we could enter. The guard was very upset by something in Teresa’s bag. He pointed with a baton and directed her to unpack. It was the monolith, of course – that solid stone thing wrapped in a thousand sheets of tissue paper – that upset the guards. “What is this?” they asked. They passed the thing through the X-ray machine a few times, and they inspected it by hand and by eye till they were convinced of its innocence. The guards walked away and waited for the next round of suspects. Teresa humbly wrapped the thing in its shroud and tucked it back into her bag. We checked in for our flight, passed through another round of security inspections, and found ourselves in a brightly lit concourse. An LED board announced a long string of destinations serviced by the terminal, including ours: London Heathrow.

While we waited for our flight to board, we searched for an exchange office. We followed a sign down a long hall, past rows of escalators, and found a fellow sitting at a desk, alone. I kept a few pound notes for my collection, and submitted the rest for inspection. The banker checked my passport and recorded my details for posterity. He then sorted and counted the notes, twice, and checked them for authenticity, folds, spindling, and mutilations. For some reason, I suddenly worried that my notes were counterfeit or soiled or ordered in some obscene fashion. “Are they alright?” I asked. “Yes, yes,” the banker answered. He dipped into his drawer and counted off a stack of greenbacks, and counted them for me, twice, just in case.

We climbed an escalator to another concourse, followed the signs for our gate, and passed through a third round of security. An airline attendant checked our boarding passes, smiled, and asked us to take a seat in the waiting area with the other passengers. The waiting area was lined with rows of seating, glass walls, and a television monitor. Except for the hum of air-conditioning, the room was silent. Our fellow passengers kept to themselves; some dozed off, others scanned their phones. We took our seats, and Teresa put her head on my shoulder. “It’s cold,” she said, as she closed her eyes for a nap. I glanced around the room and inspected the men and women who would soon travel to England with us. Their skin was pale and clear, their shoes polished, and their clothes pressed. I wondered where they had been, and what they had seen. I wondered how long they had been in Egypt. I wondered whether they ever left their air-conditioned tour buses and luxury resorts and buffet tables. I scoffed under my breath: tourists! Soon, the public address system buzzed and clicked, and a gate agent announced that it was time to go.

Teresa stretched and yawned. “Are we there yet?”

“Almost,” I said. “Did you enjoy your trip to Egypt?”

“Of course,” she answered. “Where we go next?”




*** END OF THIS TEXT Last Train to Cairo   ***