Title:Fifty Big Experiences on Amberg
Author:Coutant, Rebecca
Gender of Author: Female
Publication Year:2019
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2019
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number: B043
Source Link: https://www.amazon.com/Fifty-Experiences-Ambergris-Caye-Belize-ebook/dp/B07SZQLZGR/ref=sr_1_25?qid=1671981297&s=digital-text&sr=1-25


*** START OF THIS TEXT Fifty Big Experiences on Amberg  ***




Introduction





Belize is special. Such a tiny country - barely larger than the US state of Massachusetts - but packed with so many crazy awesome unbelievable natural wonders. So many cultural gifts. There are plenty of experiences here for the amateur archaeologist, the history buff, the wildlife lover, the experienced SCUBA diver and the adrenaline junkie, the seasoned foodie and those who just want to lounge in a hammock with a chilled rum punch. It has all you love about the Caribbean, the adventure and flair of Central America and much, much more. The ease of communication is also a huge plus - English is the official language of Belize.

Many know Belize as the home of the Great Blue Hole, for our Barrier Reef (it’s the second largest in the world), SCUBA diving, or perhaps the towering Maya pyramids, but it’s not the big ticket items that hooked me on this tiny country...that had me convinced after only one week of vacation that I NEEDED to return immediately. It was the smaller, less tangible experiences that got me dreaming of Ambergris Caye as soon as I returned home. It was the people I met, the street food I tasted, the friends I made, and how comfortable I felt so quickly.

I returned to Ambergris Caye just two months later and, in less than a year, I was placing all my New York City belongings into storage. My game plan? To try life in Belize, full-time, for just one year.

That was 2007. I was 33 years old. And I’ve been here ever since.

I’ve lived on Ambergris Caye for 12 years now - writing about my life in Belize for eight of those years. Over 2000 articles in all. So many amazing experiences, adventures, meals, parties and countless pictures of this beautiful country. It was time to pick my favorites - the must-do experiences that I recommend to family and friends, things I do myself each and every day - and to get them in one, convenient place. My Top 50 Experiences on Ambergris Caye.

You’ll quickly find that Ambergris Caye is almost totally free of all-inclusive resorts for good reason. There is so much to see, do, eat, and explore. You want to get out and get to know the island for yourself. So you can find out that while the Blue Hole and the Barrier Reef and the Maya sites are so amazing, it’s the little things that can make the island stick with you. And have you dreaming of not just your next trip to warmer weather, but your next trip to Ambergris Caye.

I hope you love this island as much as I do.

But before I dive in, a few notes. Ambergris Caye (caye is always pronounced “key” in Belize) is a surprisingly big island - 25 miles from south to north end - but the layout is fairly simple. There is really just one road running from the southern tip to about 10 miles north. The town has three main streets conveniently called Front Street (close to the sea), Middle Street and Back Street.

I have included a basic map in this book but more to give you a sense of the layout and my major landmarks. When out and about, do NOT be shy about asking for directions (even you guys!) - you will find that almost everyone is happy to help AND you’ll often get some tips and local color along the way.

Lastly, I HIGHLY recommend a day trip to Caye Caulker. Less than 10 miles away, the island is smaller, more laid back...reminiscent of what San Pedro was 15 to 20 years ago. I’ve included a bonus 9 activities to get you started on Caye Caulker.

Enjoy. And send me a note. If you think something should be added to this list - let me know! Feedback or suggestions, things that worked for you or didn’t. Send photos! You can find me at SanPedroScoop.com.








Part I





Savory and Sweet, Let’s Eat





Eating and drinking local makes sense no matter where you travel - for your taste buds, for the local economy, and also for your wallet. Let me explain something before I start talking about one of my favorite things - fantastic food.

The first thing you will probably notice if you head out grocery shopping is the prices. Wine! Ben & Jerry’s Ice Cream! Doritos! Oh my. These prices are high because these items are imported - you are paying for shipping and the costly duty.

Look for the local stuff. How about crunchy plantain chips instead of the Doritos? Or a bag of green mango dipped in salt and chili. If you want to know where you can get the very best filet mignon? It’s imported. The answer is probably Texas or Argentina. Why not try local fare like arrachares or stew chicken instead?

If you are on a budget or just want to enjoy the amazing food of Belize, eat and drink local.





CHAPTER I. Taste it All with Belize Food Tours





When I booked my very first vacation to Belize in 2006, Belizean cuisine didn’t even cross my mind. I mean….I’d never seen a Belize food truck, a Belizean restaurant in the States or heard mention of Belizean cooking on the Food Channel.

I’ve visited a bunch of Caribbean islands and a few Central American countries over the years - from Grenada and Aruba to Costa Rica - and didn’t have any food experiences that stuck with me. This was most likely my fault - I spent a good deal of my limited vacation time at All-Inclusives. The focus seemed to be more all-you-can-eat rather than unique regional dining.

But Belize wowed me with the food - in the very first week. I returned to my apartment in NY craving rice and beans and fresh watermelon juice. I wanted to squeeze Belizean lime on everything. But I still didn’t really know all about the multicultural mash-up that is Belizean food - I only knew that I was hooked.

Belize Food Tours (B.F.T.) is the easiest, fastest, most fun way to get a full overview of the local ingredients, cultures and culinary history of the country - but more specifically, the blend that makes up Ambergris Caye. If I had to coin a culinary category, I’d say Latino-Caribbean Seafood...though it doesn’t fit exactly in that slot either. Whatever you call it, Belizean food is delicious.

B.F.T. is San Pedrano-owned and relatively new. Felipe, Dora, and their team do an incredible job, keeping it crazy-fun and informative, and make sure you get more than your money's worth. For the lunch tour - the price includes six or seven good sized portions of food and up to five cocktails and drinks at a wide array of local restaurants and shops. PLUS a dessert or two. It gives you a great overview of the town and the distinctive history of the island - plus, a good feel for what and where you might want to eat for the rest of your vacation.

Local Term: San Pedrano (male) and San Pedrana (female) - a person born and raised on Ambergris Caye.





For all the information, as well as booking and pricing, see their very user-friendly website BelizeFoodTours.com.





CHAPTER II. Eat Tacos...for Breakfast




Tacos are hugely popular in Belize but they are not the ones that many Americans are used to. Tacos, for the most part, are a breakfast food. Fresh, soft corn tortillas filled with shredded chicken or pork and rolled up like tiny cigars - breakfast is never one or two tacos, it’s a plate of 6...12...maybe 14.

For just around $5bzd, you can get a plate of tacos, a large cup of watermelon juice or cold horchata - but you’ll want to do it before 10 or 10:30 am.

Note: Horchata - Pronounced hor-CHA-ta is essentially sweetened rice milk. When made fresh, it is dry rice, soaked in water and squeezed through cheesecloth, sweetened with a good amount of sugar and spiced with cinnamon (always) and sometimes nutmeg. Over ice it is delicious.





You will see tiny taco stalls set up all over town - concentrated on the side and back streets - from as early as 6 am. One of my favorite places is Neri’s Tacos. They are SERIOUSLY popular and vying for position in the front row at the counter is important, in fact, it’s part of the fun. Order the tacos. Chicken are 3 for $1bzd and pork 2 for a dollar. You can request with or without pepper (hot sauce) or with or without finely chopped onions.

Neri’s also has a rainbow of juices in huge 5-gallon buckets: cantaloupe, watermelon, orange, lime, horchata, and my very favorite...banana.

I know what you are thinking - how do you juice a banana? And though I’m not exactly sure - here’s my best guess for the recipe. Throw a few ripe bananas in a blender, add a good glug of condensed milk and a huge handful of ice. Sprinkle liberally with nutmeg and blend until juiced. Banana juice!

Would I store it in the fridge for a week? NO! But Neri’s easily ladles up the five gallons in one morning. And though they don’t serve alcohol, I bet it is really delicious with dark rum.

Here is my regular order at Neri’s. Three dolla pork tacos with onion, no pepper (you’ll get six). A cup of banana juice. (Do NOT leave without the banana juice - it is HEAVEN.)

$5bzd and I have a breakfast feast.

Neri’s is located a few blocks from Tropic Air - back near the lagoon. Tricky enough that I’ve marked it on the map.

Fun Fact: The “World Record” posted at Neri’s is 57 Tacos Eaten in One Sitting. And then there is a sign right next to it where someone tried to beat that record and TIED. At 57! He couldn’t eat just one more taco? Perhaps it’s time you give it a go.





CHAPTER III. Cool off with Delicious Paletas




Paletas means small stick in Spanish but it’s what surrounds the stick that is so heavenly on a hot San Pedro day. I’d be tempted to call paletas “ice pops” but that would be selling these tasty treats short. Artisanal, small batch popsicles? Better…but WAY too hipster for Belize.

Paletas are typical Mexican and Central American treats - frozen bars of fruit, sometimes sugar and cream. With big chunks of fresh fruit, fun local flavors and an affordable price tag - $2-3bzd each - you can taste them all. In the hottest months of the year? I can easily eat 4 or 5 a week.

Regina’s Paletas are my favorite. Regina Sansores is a mom, a wife, a born & raised San Pedrana and an entrepreneur. In 2014, she was looking for a business niche - and thought of the ice cream and paletas she enjoyed when she visited Mexico. She set up a small shop in her home - with the molds and professional freezers - brought in fresh fruits and got started. Now, you can find her paletas in classic and more gourmet flavors in stores all over the island - and she has turned the first floor of her home into a SUPER cute paleteria.

Fun Fact: While my American palate gravitates towards fruit flavors like fresh pina colada, tart refreshing lime and seasonal mango, the most popular flavor that Regina sells on Ambergris Caye is CHAMOY.

Cha-what? Chamoy is a regional flavor that you’ll see in candy and drinks here on the island and around Mexico. It’s sweet, savory, tart, bitter, salty, and spicy all in one. You might find “chamoy” in a bottle in the international section of your supermarket or at a Latino Market. Look for a deep, deep red liquid lined up next to the hot sauces. It’s...strange. Take my word for it… Mango-Chamoy and Tamarind-Chamoy paletas are acquired tastes.





Regina’s Paletas are available at San Pedrano Store on Front Street, Beach Basket Belize at Grand Caribe Resort, Cool Cone at the Truck Stop, La Divina Providencia Store, at Rojo Lounge in pretty cocktails and at Las Paletas, her spot, about 1.5 miles north of town and just next door to Robin’s Kitchen (Experience #10 on my list).





CHAPTER IV. Weekend Brunch At Estel’s By The Sea



Estel’s Dine by the Sea is THE most popular breakfast spot in San Pedro and a MUST-VISIT on your first or 40th trip to Belize. Estel’s is a family joint started many years ago by Charles Sr. (a professional musician who moved down from the states in the early ‘70s), and his Belizean ex-wife, Estel. You’ll still find Estel working the cash register, Charles Sr. at “his seat” in the corner surrounded by memorabilia, playing solitaire and making the music selections (always diner-style Oldies). Their sons Charles and Mark work at Estel’s too - grilling and bartending.

On weekends, you’ll find Charles Jr. just outside working a HUGE grill (often more than one) with chicken, sausage and ribs. Take a good look as you enter...these grilled meats sell out quickly.

Estel’s is famous for many things but here’s what you really need to know. They open at 6 am, they do breakfast all day, and they make the best fry jacks in Belize.

Local term: Fry Jack or fryjack - flour tortilla dough that is fried in oil until it puffs and lightly browns. Similar to state fair-style fried dough in the US - though a bit lighter - and served without the powdered sugar. You can eat them with honey, jam or slather them with refried beans.





The famous fry jacks at Estel’s Dine by the Sea



Head on in. Find a table on the back “porch” - your toes will be in the sand and one of the best beachfront views before you.

My suggestions for two people: Get a plate of BBQ and also get some eggs and fry jacks. And then maybe an extra plate of fry jacks. And then maybe another. They are THAT good. Also, try a michelada here. (I’ll explain that breakfast cocktail in Experience #16)

Estel’s By the Sea is on the beachfront JUST south of Central Park in San Pedro town. Open from 6 am to 5 pm. Closed on Tuesdays.





CHAPTER V. Feast at Elvi’s Friday Night Maya Buffett



Miss Elvi started a hamburger and local food joint over 40 years ago when San Pedro was a tiny fishing village with nary a tourist in sight. Now her spot has expanded in every way, but Elvi’s Kitchen is still very much a family affair. Miss Elvi, now well into her 80s, participates on a daily basis. In her upstairs home, she makes the famous coconut pie and sends it down to the restaurant. This warm coconut pie with vanilla ice cream and the frozen key lime pie are on my Top 5 list of best desserts in Belize.

The head chef at Elvi’s Kitchen is now her youngest daughter Jennie. Chef Jennie has introduced Belizean food to people around the world - including Prince Harry on his official trip to Belize in 2012. A crazy exciting royal visit to Belize but sadly, one that was pre-Meghan Markle.

I DO want to use this opportunity to formally invite Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex, and his new family back to Belize. If you see him, please let him know.

Chef Jennie specializes in Mayan cuisine - her own sophisticated modern take on these ancient flavors. The Maya and other indigenous people were the first to cook with beans, chocolate, peppers, corn, and tomatoes. These ingredients were unknown in Europe until they were brought back by the conquistadors in the 16th century. It’s so hard to imagine Switzerland without chocolate and Italy without tomatoes, but all those ingredients were brought from the “New World” where the Maya had been farming and cooking with them for centuries.

Elvi’s Kitchen is open every day but Sunday for both lunch and dinner. The large, varied taco menu is one of my favorite lunches; I love the Mango-Chipotle BBQ beef tacos in their thick handmade corn tortillas with a variety of dipping sauces. Their coconut curried shrimp is also VERY popular and over-the-top delicious.

You’ll always find extremely happy eaters at Elvi’s, but it’s the Friday night Maya Feast that really brings in the big crowds. Make sure to get a reservation, especially in the busier season (between Christmas and Easter). The food is fresh and varied all night long...and offerings range from Maya spiced hot chocolate to assorted tamales, soup and dessert. It’s a great spot for a super festive fun night out that’s perfect for both families and large groups under the flamboyant tree that stood behind Miss Elvi’s original hamburger stand.

Elvi’s Kitchen is located on Middle Street. There is live music for the Friday night buffet and the regular menu is still available. For more information - including their menus, see ElvisKitchen.com.





CHAPTER VI. Rice and Beans at Briana’s Deli


You cannot and should not visit Belize without eating one dish - Stewed Chicken with Rice and Beans. It’s widely considered the national food of Belize and it is positively addicting.

Traditionally served as a HUGE lunch plate or sometimes for dinner, it’s deceptively simple yet seriously delicious. White rice is mixed with cooked kidney beans and coconut oil and/or coconut milk. The chicken is rubbed with recado, browned and then cooked down (or “stewed”) with onions, sometimes tomatoes and sweet (bell) peppers. Recado is a deep red spice paste that is not hot-spicy, just flavorful. It gives the meat a bit of a twang.

I was TOTALLY hooked on the meal on my first visit but as you eat more, you’ll find that it varies depending on where you go. My favorite on the island is lunch at Briana’s Deli on Back Street. I eat there 2-3 times a week and I will NEVER EVER get sick of their rice and beans.

Walk in. The small restaurant is bustling from about 11:30 am to 1 pm with locals and visitors. Stew chicken is always on the menu, but there are more options including the “daily special” written on the board. Order at the counter and take a seat.

Food comes fast. And the portions (prices are generally $10-14bzd depending on the dish) are hearty. Watch out! There will be a small dish of “onion sauce” that comes with each plate. It is chopped onions, vinegar, and habanero. Simple and delicious but HOT. You’ll watch many of your fellow diners (including tiny school kids) dump the contents all over their food. I suggest you proceed with a bit more caution.

Note: Habanero peppers are the most popular pepper in Belize - and one of the key ingredients in Marie Sharp’s hot sauce. Shaped like little bells about the size of a ping-pong ball, the habanero comes in beautiful colors. Green unripe to vibrant yellow, orange, red, and eggplant purple. Don’t let those colors fool you. THEY ARE NOT SKITTLES. Habaneros are some of the hottest peppers on earth- up to 100x hotter than jalapenos.





Tip: The specials - from Beef Soup or Cowfoot Soup Mondays to Pigtail and Split Pea Tuesdays - sell out QUICKLY. Get there before 12:30 for the full range of options.





Briana’s Deli is located on Back Street and opens for lunch and dinner on all days except Sundays and holidays.

Bonus information: If ANY dish is a close runner-up for National Dish of Belize, it would be fried chicken or locally, “fry chicken” from Chinese shops. There seems to be a local Chinese take-out counter in every small village, town or city across Belize. San Pedro has 20? 30? It’s hard to say. Ordered by the dollar amount - for example, “6 dolla fry chicken” - it always comes in a To-Go container with a heap of french fries. Locals tend to SMOTHER it all with sweet ketchup - both the chicken and the fries. In a country with no franchises like McDonald’s or KFC, fry chicken is absolutely the fast food of Belize.





CHAPTER VII. Conch Ceviche and “Fry” Fish at Lily’s Treasure Chest




One of my favorite fish dishes on the island can be found at a relatively humble restaurant loved by locals and visitors alike. Situated right on the beach in town, Lily’s Treasure Chest has one of the most beautiful town views - and serves my favorite fish dish and the best classic ceviche I’ve ever tasted.

Note: Ceviche is a hugely popular Belizean dish - and a staple on Ambergris Caye. It’s served at every gathering - every party, wedding or holiday - with friends and family on the island. While it is often prepared with shrimp or lobster or fish, conch is the favorite. Conch, pronounced “CONK”, is a large snail (don’t freak out!) that is in season from October 15 to June 1. Chopped, marinated with lime and mixed with tomato, onion, cilantro and sometimes carrot, it’s eaten with corn chips or just by the spoonful and is beyond delicious.





Order a plate of ceviche at Lily’s, but also order the fried fish. Thick, flaky FRESH fish fillet with really well-seasoned coating...always moist and so delicious. It comes with rice and beans or fries and some tartar sauce. It’s so good, I generally skip the tartar. And I LOVE tartar sauce.


You can ask Miss Nellie, the owner for well over 10 years, for her fried fish secrets; we do each and every time we are in there. How can fish be this moist and good each time I come in?

Prepare to come up empty. It keeps you coming back to Lily’s Treasure Chest.

Lily’s Treasure Chest is located on the beach across from the big Amigos Del Mar dive shop dock.





CHAPTER VIII. Conch Fritters at El Fogon Restaurant




El Fogon is a charming local restaurant opened by San Pedro-born Ms. Susana about 15 years ago. It’s the only spot I know of where they still use a fogon or an outside fire hearth to prepare many of their dishes. You’ll see it right under the palapa when you enter the restaurant.

I would describe the type of food at El Fogon as classic homestyle Belizean food but...extra special good.

Ms. Susana relinquished the day-to-day operations of El Fogon to her daughter Olive and Olive’s husband, Luis. But Susana is still “on call” - she lives above El Fogon and will come right downstairs if she smells something “not quite right” or if, god forbid, they attempt to change the menu. Tradition is important at El Fogon.

Cooking with a fire hearth is a lot of work - gathering wood, tending the fire, and regulating the temperature, but many swear that the smoky flavor it imparts to the dishes cannot be beaten.

El Fogon does many traditional Belizean dishes beautifully and they have specials that are as good as they sound - like Belikin-fried Chicken and creamy Lobster chowder - but my very favorite dish is the Conch Fritters.

Almost every bar and restaurant on the island does them during conch season but El Fogon’s are absolute perfection. Light and FILLED with chunks of conch, order a plateful or two for the table. You might find there is no room for lunch or dinner afterward. Yum.

Tip: I adore key lime pie and though it was invented in Key West, Florida, Belize has made it our own. Often tweaking the name to “Caye Lime Pie”, El Fogon’s twist on this classic is divine and a bit out of the ordinary. The “pie” is frozen in a bowl with the graham cracker crumbs on the bottom. The recipe is zingy and rich, cool and heavenly, and not too sweet. Save room!





El Fogon is located just around the bend from Tropic Air. You can find a map and the menus on ElFogonBelize.com.





CHAPTER IX. Grab Weekend Barbecue To-Go




At about 8 am on Saturday morning, San Pedro town starts to smell like heaven as charcoal grills are fired up in backyards, on street corners, the parks…

But let me back up just a bit. I am from New Jersey, USA - so I don’t take barbecue as seriously as some - like y’all from the Carolinas or Texas. I don’t know apple vs. cherry wood or the nuances of vinegar or tomato-based sauces. Here’s what I do know - there is some delicious grilled chicken on Ambergris Caye. And I know that smoky charred barbecue and cool coleslaw are the perfect combination of savory and creamy and sweet.

My “BBQ guy” is Tino. He sets up on Saturdays at the roundabout just north of town - right outside of “my supermarket” Caye-Mart. Not only is Tino lovely and makes mean BBQ but he is also my postman. That’s his weekday job. So when I receive mail, about twice a year, he lets me know so I can pick it up. Delicious BBQ AND personalized mail service with a smile. The kinds of things that make me very happy to live in this small town.

My mailing address is Rebecca Coutant, San Pedro, Belize. Just in case you were wondering.

BBQ at Tino’s and in general is ready around 10 am...and then available until 2 or 3 pm - depending on when they sell out. Some spots can sell up to 75 lbs of chicken in one day on a busy weekend.

Here’s what you are going to get when you order Classic BBQ in Belize: a take-away plate with grilled chicken (order leg or breast) with BBQ sauce, coleslaw and your choice of Rice & Beans OR stew beans and a few flour tortillas. If you want rice and beans AND a few tortillas, just ask - and give the vendor an extra dollar or two.

If you are not heading home, head to the beach. Eating BBQ and enjoying the ocean breeze in your golf cart or sitting on a dock is the best. In fact, BBQ tastes better that way.

Tino’s tent is on the roundabout on Saturdays - outside Caye Mart Supermarket.





CHAPTER X. Jerk Chicken at Robin’s Kitchen




Jamaican/Belizean John Harvey, wife Angie and his son John Jr., run a very informal and VERY popular little palapa south of town. They are known all over for perhaps the best chicken on Ambergris Caye.

They are also known for being some of the warmest friendliest folks you’ll meet. On an island known for friendly people AND an island known for BBQ, Robin’s Kitchen shines. You’ll want to hug them as you leave, for the hospitality and the chicken.

The most popular dish BY FAR is the jerk chicken. To me, jerk seasoning can sometimes be too much. Too salty, too spicy, overpowering. But Robin’s serves their charred-tender chicken right off the grill with a side dish of fruity-savory jerk sauce that I would gladly slather on anything and everything. It’s MAGIC.

Tip #1: Don’t go to Robin’s Kitchen when you are in a rush - the chicken is ready when the chicken is ready! Have a seat, chat with these guys and trust that it is worth the wait. Also, Robin’s serves sodas and fresh juices but not alcohol. There is a small deli next door that sells beer but you are welcome to BYO wine or cocktails.





Tip #2: Regina’s Paletas (Experience #3) is right next door - just south of John’s palapa. BBQ jerk chicken followed by a lime-ginger paleta? Ay dios mio! Yes please!





Robin’s Kitchen is located about 1.5 miles south of town - just south of the Banana Beach Resort. Look for a small palapa and follow the delicious smell. They are closed on Friday evenings and Saturday day.





CHAPTER XI. Devour Pupusas




Have you been looking for ways to get more melty cheese into your routine? Let me introduce you to pupusas. A Latin American hot pocket - a Salvadoran grilled-cheese.

Pupusas are thick pancakes of masa (the key ingredient in corn tortillas) stuffed with cheese, meat, beans...basically anything that you want to put in them. This very traditional dish of El Salvador was brought to Belize by immigrants from our southern neighbor.

You’ll find two restaurants in downtown San Pedro that set up gas-powered griddles on the street-front starting around 5:30 pm. Pupuseria El Salvadorian on the Middle Street and Waraguma Restaurant on Back Street. Order from the list of combinations. The classic is beans, cheese and pork. I LOVE the chicken & cheese and the pumpkin (zucchini) and cheese - they are my favorites.

Watching the ladies effortlessly roll out the balls of corn paste, stuff them and then slap them on the flat top is mesmerizing. The smell is ridiculously intoxicating. The four or five minutes it takes to grill them up seems like an eternity. But be patient. The salty mozzarella that leaks out and browns around the pupusa is the very best part. I’m getting hungry just typing this.

Pupusas are best eaten immediately. They are served with crispy cabbage slaw (yum) and a watery red salsa (not my favorite) on the side. Try a bunch of different flavors. And no matter what your eyes tell you, don’t eat more than three in one sitting. Or maybe four IF you pride yourself on a big appetite. If you consume more, lie down immediately.

If you are staying south of town, there is a great grocery store and restaurant just off the main road called La Divina Providencia. They do pupusas each evening at 5:30 also - and Miss Susana and her team are absolutely fantastic. Try one of the dessert pupusas!





CHAPTER XII. Late Day Cake by the Post Office



Each afternoon, at about 3 pm, two pretty ladies pull up with a folding table and a few large bins brimming with cake slices, pie and puddings.

Look for the table in front of the post office - the yellow building on the middle of Middle Street. Slices are $5bzd each and range from cheesecake with cherry topping to dense, creamy flans to some local favorites. Try the tri-colored (red, green and yellow) soft cake with caramel topping. YUM. Tres Leches Cake. Lime Pie. Bread pudding spiced with cinnamon and nutmeg.

I’ve never left with just one piece. Cold cake and coffee are a winning breakfast combination. You’ll be SO glad you got extra.

Look for the cake table from 3ish to evening every day except Sundays and holidays.

Bonus Information: If a slice of pie is what you crave, you are on the right island. Georgie at The Gallery is “The Pie Queen of San Pedro” - and she makes GORGEOUS pies for purchase by the slice or a whole pie. The key lime with thick homemade cookie crust is to die for - as is the coconut cream pie. It can be a bit pricey - especially if you are buying imported-fruit pie like raspberry or peach - but man is it good. Look for Georgie’s pie sign and The Gallery just north of the San Pedro High School. And believe it or not, her New York Style cheesecake is better than most I’ve tasted in NY. Just the right balance of sweet and tangy.





CHAPTER XIII. Hail the Annie’s Pastry Cart (or Stop in The Bakery)



Annie’s Pastry Shop is not your average bakery. It doesn’t open at the crack of dawn…in fact, it doesn’t open until mid-afternoon but there is a very good reason for that.

Look for the pink and gold-glitter storefront on the main road just across from the San Pedro High School. As the school bell rings at 3 pm, Annie’s opens - filling with kids looking for sweet and savory snacks. Annie’s also has a small fleet of tricycle carts that fan out around town carrying bins of treats for sale. Just listen for the honking bicycle horn.

Head into the bakery and grab a tray and tongs. The shelves hold baskets of all sorts of treats - jalapeno poppers, mini-pizzas, coconut tarts, rolls and pretty Mexican sugared buns called conchas. And some I wasn’t familiar with at first - more local favorites like Chicken Flutes (pastry cones filled with cream cheese, chicken and topped with sugar) and sweet ham sandwiches. Just take as many as you like and head to the counter.

The front counter is where you can find my personal favorites. The cake slices and the cheese dip, chicken dip, and when in season, lobster dip.

My regular order: chicken dip (served in a segmented container with the dip on one side and a heap of corn chips on the other) and a slice of Better-Than-Sex Cake. Tender yellow cake with vanilla pudding, fruit cocktail and whipped topping. Annie’s has a gorgeous selection of cake slices.

Annie’s Pastries is located just north of town, across from the High School and opens 3 pm to 9 pm every day except Sunday.





CHAPTER XIV. Sushi Night at Blue Water Grill




Blue Water Grill, set on an expansive, raised ocean-front deck, is one of the most popular restaurants in all of Belize. Open 365 days a year - they serve great salads and sandwiches for lunch (check out the daily specials, too). The dinner menu is creative and varied - from brick oven pizzas to fresh fish to a great wine and cocktail menu - there really is something for everyone at Blue Water Grill.

But the most popular nights of the week - in a very busy restaurant - are Sushi Tuesday and Thursdays. I know what you are thinking and yes...you are right. Sushi is not traditional Belizean food. But rice and fresh seafood make it a great fit for this country. Blue Water Grill does traditional sashimi, nigiri, and rolls but then also add in Belizean elements that make it so special. And delicious. Think mango and avocado and perhaps a little Marie Sharp's hot sauce.

During much of the year, you will need a reservation for Sushi Nights. The place is packed with locals and visitors - often the town’s “movers and shakers”.

OMG! Is that the Prime Minister of Belize?

Tip: One of San Pedro’s most photo-worthy signs hangs on the wall of Blue Water Grill - “I LOVE BELIZE” all in lights that change for the season. Say CHEESE! Also, stop in and check out the great branded merchandise they have - hats, reusable bags, shirts, YETI cups - souvenirs that say Belize that you’ll actually want to use when you get home.





Bonus Information: Kelly and Mukul, the owners of Blue Water Grill, sponsor and facilitate so many amazing projects around the island. Check out the information posted in the lobby or that comes with your bill. You can donate to the monthly “Wish List” and they will match your donation. Projects have included ceiling fans for the local school and a generous donation to the local cancer society.





Blue Water Grill is located on the beachfront on the southern end of San Pedro Town or enter at the Sunbreeze Hotel across the street from the Tropic Air terminal. For more information about the restaurant and their incredible programs - see their website bluewatergrillbelize.com.





PART II





Drinks & Cocktails





CHAPTER XV. Pick Your Favorite Belikin




Belikin beer is absolutely the unofficial official drink of Belize. In fact, until about 10 years ago, it was pretty much the only beer that you could find in the entire country. Belize is now part of CARICOM (the Caribbean Community made up of 15 trading partners) and we have a few more imported options- like Red Stripe from Jamaica, Kubuli from Dominica, Presidente beer for the Dominican Republic, and a couple others like Parbo, the taste of Surinam. Belikin is, by far, the local favorite.

As of April 2019, we even have a brand-new craft beer brewed and canned in southern Belize by the Hobbs Company - a Hummingbird Pale Ale and a Wild Cat IPA. Look for it at local bars.

Belikin/Bowen & Bowen is also one of the biggest employers in the country. Second only to the Government of Belize. You’ll see the B&B tractors towing trailers and delivering soda and beer around the island.

If you order “a beer” at any bar in Belize, you’ll probably be handed a Belikin regular. They also make Lighthouse Lager (a slightly smaller, lighter beer - that locals often call a “ladies beer”), Belikin Stout with a hefty 7% alcohol, and Belizean Guinness.

Each spring, around late April, Belikin releases a Chocolate Stout for Easter and the May Chocolate Festival that takes place in Southern Belize. December sees Belikin’s Sorrel Stout hit the shelves - with the flavor of hibiscus, a very traditional holiday wine flavor.

More recently, Bowen & Bowen has started bottling Landshark Beer. Often served with a lime, some call it a “Belizean Corona”. I’ll let you be the judge.

If you are a fan of beer, it’s fun to taste them all - may I suggest you drink them as cold as possible - and kick off your vacation with a favorite.

Tip: Belikin JUST opened a new shop in town - across from the Tropic Air terminal - and it has ice-cold beer on tap, some really great souvenirs, and Belikin decor for your man cave.





CHAPTER XVI. Enjoy A Michelada - A Beer For Breakfast




Breakfast beer? Don’t cringe just yet! If you enjoy the idea of a Bloody Mary with brunch or even if you like your beer with lime, give this one a try.

A michelada (pronounced miCH-a-la-da) originates in Mexico but is very popular in Belize. The drink is particularly well known as a cure for “goma” - that’s Kriol for a hangover. But this beer cocktail (stop cringing!) is surprisingly tart and refreshing and flavorful.

Here are the basic ingredients: Fresh lime juice, seasoned salt, a few dashes of Worcestershire and then a few drops of Marie Sharp’s hot sauce (more or less as specified) - add lots of ice to a good sized glass and pour over a Belikin beer or a Lighthouse. The excess beer (that which didn’t fit in the glass) is served on the side so you can top up yourself.

Ordered alone or with breakfast, I think every beer lover needs to try this one. Forget your Sunday brunch Bloody Mary (Clamato Mary aka the Bloody Ceasar for you Canadians) just once and do as the Belizeans do. You might find yourself playing with the ratios - lime for acidity...or more hot sauce heat...and making these at home.





CHAPTER XVII. Drink Rum. Period.




Is drinking rum an activity? Absolutely. Especially if you head to the Travellers’ Got Rum? Shop on Middle Street in San Pedro town. But let me back up a bit first...

Rum and a few local wines (cashew, Belizean blackberry, and other local fruits) are the only distilled spirits made in this country from purely Belizean ingredients.

Raw sugar is one of the country’s largest exports. If you head to the northern districts of Belize, you’ll pass through miles and miles of Belizean sugar cane. On Ambergris Caye, we have miles and miles of beach bars and resorts serving Belizean rum cocktails.

A great way to become acquainted with the different types and flavors of rum is to stop by Traveller’s Rum on Middle Street. The company has been making rum in Belize City from Belizean molasses for over 65 years. The staff is incredibly knowledgeable about the product and the selection; the flavors are really impressive.

They will ask, What do you normally drink at home? How do you like to drink it -neat or in cocktails? Do you lean towards something a bit sweeter or something more smooth? Then you get to work. Tasting some of the newer rums and then the aged beauties like the 10-year Don Omar Vintage Rum. They have a rum called Cane Juice that’s a bit stronger and the perfect ingredient for mojitos and caipirinhas; they have coconut rum flavored with natural Belize coconut, not artificial flavors.

Tip: Coconut rum is the key ingredient in Ambergris Caye’s festive “official” cocktail. The classic Panty Ripper or Panti Rippa contains pineapple juice and coconut rum. Careful, these drinks go down way too easy. Stop by Saul’s Rum and Coffee House on Middle Street to buy a seriously cute Panty Ripper t-shirt.



Tiburon (Spanish for shark) Rum was introduced a few years ago and is already winning international acclaim. It is an 8-year Blended Reserve Rum, molasses based and aged in old oak bourbon barrels. Tiburon recently won a gold medal at the prestigious 2019 San Francisco World Spirits Competition.

Here’s why I am suggesting Belizean rum. (1) It is world class. Really good stuff. A fun way to mix it up. If you like vodka & tonic at home, try a rum & tonic. Or go crazy and get a white rum and watermelon juice. Even if you think you don’t like rum, this Traveller’s tasting could very easily change your mind. (2) It’s made in Belize. And... (3) It is WAY more affordable than imported alcohol.

All would make excellent souvenirs for the rum lovers in your life, but I particularly like the small round bottles of Travellers’ Coconut Rum and One-Barrel. At just about 12 ounces (375ml) - they are labeled “Fluffy Gial” and “Barrelito”. Cute.





CHAPTER XVIII. Find Your Favorite Fanta




Sodas taste better in Belize, and I figure that there are two good reasons for it. (1) More scientific: They are made with real cane sugar rather than corn syrup. Sugar is plentiful in Belize, corn is not. (2) Less scientific but totally real: Soda tastes better when you drink it directly from a thick glass bottle.

Here is one of the top activities that my nephews (three of them - under the age of 10) enjoyed when they visited me on Ambergris Caye. Tasting all the flavors of Fanta and finding a favorite for the week!

How it’s done. Buy one of each color Fanta at the grocery store or local shop - pineapple (yellow), grape (purple), fruit punch (red), orange (orange), root beer (brown) and start tasting. Find your favorite and groan at the ones that taste like marshmallow bubble gum. (Hint: RED!)

Bonus information: You’ll notice that the glass bottles are HEAVY. That is because they are collected and used again and again. Up to 12 times according to Bowen & Bowen - who bottles both Belikin beer and our soda. You’ll pay a 25 cent Belize deposit on the bottle - return them to the store with your next purchase.





For-the-kids bonus: Many beach bars serve buckets of beer with an opener attached to the bucket by a string. Let your kids order a bucket of sodas and open the soda themselves. They get a ridiculous thrill from it. OR...hit the local gift shops and let them buy a bottle opener/keychain to carry for the week. Great stories for the kids to tell at school the following week...the time Dad let me carry a beer opener on my belt.





CHAPTER XIX. Sip a Cocktail at a Fancy Resort



Some of the most gorgeous resorts on the island are a bit of a splurge. But when I’m feeling a bit Kim Kardashian or even a bit blue, I LOVE to just stop into one of the luxe lodges and perhaps have a cocktail and an appetizer or dessert. Enjoy the great service and the gorgeous surroundings, forget about all the weeds in our yard at home, maybe stroll around the beachfront and check out the gift shop...a bit of a getaway from my real life. Let’s just call it pre-planning for when I strike it RICH!

Two of my beach favorites at different ends of the island are Mata Chica Resort at 5 miles north and Victoria House at 2 miles south.

Mata Chica is a honeymooner’s paradise with fruit-colored private cabanas set all along the beach. Their dock is one of the most beautiful on the island - with its signature herringbone pattern and pod-like loungers jutting out over the sea. The lobby, restaurant and bar feel a bit like a Moroccan lounge...it’s stunning. And the perfect spot to enjoy a fresh fruit margarita or a Key lime martini.

Located just a few miles south of San Pedro town, Victoria House is one of the island’s oldest resorts. The lush green grounds are absolutely beautiful - the stately plantation style buildings and the infinity pools, impressive. Enjoy a cocktail at their beachfront bar with some fresh ceviche. It makes for a lovely late afternoon.





PART III





Shopping





CHAPTER XX. Buy Belizean Hardwood at Graniel’s Dreamland



The British, the very first European settlers in Belize, came for the huge trees deep in the jungle - at first, the logwood for their red dye and then mahogany and other hardwoods.

A great spot to see a HUGE selection of hardwood creations is Graniel’s Dreamland on Middle Street. Armando Graniel and his family design, craft, and supply so many beautiful wooden pieces for the island. Huge canopy bed frames, tables crafted from enormous slabs of Santa Maria wood, custom cabinets for the most beautiful kitchens.

The woods come in an amazing variety of colors - pink seagrape, which is grown right on this island; swirling rosewood, which is now illegal to cut; and almost black, dense zericote wood. Some light as styrofoam, some heavy as stone.

You can’t bring a bed frame home (easily) but you can buy a wooden bowl. (I love the irregular ones that show the swirls and knots of the tree.) Or a cutting board with a rainbow of natural colors. There is a huge selection at Graniel’s, and you can easily spend an hour or more picking up each and every unique souvenir.

Tip: Pay with cash if you can and you’ll get a discount. Also, if you fall in LOVE with something larger, like one of the beautiful and shockingly comfortable folding clamshell chairs, they can pack it to check on the airplane OR ship it to your home.





Graniel’s Dreamland is located near the southern end of Middle Street. They do close for lunch from 12 to 1 pm-ish and on Sundays.





CHAPTER XXI. Find Unique Coral & Conch Carvings at Mr. Dimas’ Shop



Conch shells are something that you’ll see all around Ambergris Caye. They are carried home by tourists as souvenirs (but never in your carry-on!), used for outside decorations, and carved by artisans into all sorts of things.

But they weren’t always seen as art. In fact, 50 years ago, the shells were so abundant in the tiny fishing village of San Pedro that they were often laid down as a base of a home before cement was poured or used as landfill. They were seen as junk, much like coconut husks. Thrown aside and forgotten.

Dimas Guerrero, born and raised in San Pedro, had an idea. In the early 1960s at about the age of 11, he’d left school to work in the fishing industry with his father. But in his spare time, he was carving driftwood and tree barks, and he found that he possessed a natural gift. One day, Dimas received an odd stick from a fisherman who had found it in a shrimp boat net. He took the stick and carved six pendants. To Mr. Dimas’ surprise, a tourist saw him wearing one of the pendants and bought it from him. The visitor identified the substance as black coral - a rare and valuable deep-water coral that no one knew about in Belize.

Mr. Dimas was the first in Belize to obtain a license to harvest the black coral and use it to make jewelry and carvings. He also had one of the first gift shops on the island and was part of the very first group of locals to be certified in SCUBA diving over 40 years ago.

Mr. Dimas stopped diving due to problems with his eyes but still works almost every day in his shop carving beautiful pieces from shells of all types, brown and black corals, horn, bone, and stones. He also works in gold and silver and makes gorgeous custom pieces.

Fun Fact: 1 in 10-15,000 conch shells contains a “conch pearl”. The pearls are most frequently pink, but they can be white, yellow or even brown. The highest grade of these rare gems can be worth more than diamonds. I have only seen one while living in Belize. A fisherman offered to sell me one - and I declined. The asking price was over $1000bzd.





His shop, D&G Fine Jewelry and Art, is a hidden gem filled with island history. Stop in and check out his work and stay for the stories. About the fishing industry in San Pedro - or the first San Pedranos to strap on diving tanks. About the visit of Mr. Jacques Cousteau to Belize or Mr. Dimas’ years on the local dart club that traveled internationally to win competitions.

D&G can be a little bit tricky to find but look for the sign across the street from San Pedro High School. It’s just a turn at the sign and then another right. Not far at all.





CHAPTER XXII. Admire The Art of Belize at Belizean Arts


Some of my most valuable possessions are pieces of art and handmade crafts that I bought on vacations. I’m not talking about pieces that require a fine-arts degree or insurance valuations; I’m talking prints or carvings that I LOVE. (I even have a painted rock from Seine Bight in Southern Belize that I’m obsessed with.) Art is sometimes a bit of a splurge, but each and every souvenir brings me joy and reminds me of a favorite place.

Belizeans Arts Gallery, tucked inside Fido’s Beach Bar’s huge palapa on Front Street, has the finest selection of art, jewelry, carvings, and just interesting stuff on the island.

A few of my tips for buying art in Belize or anywhere on vacation! First, and most importantly - do not buy a piece of art when you are tipsy. (Belizean Arts makes this doubly tricky since it is basically located inside of a bar!) Two, be true to your budget. Don’t go crazy and buy something that costs as much as your entire vacation if you will never be able to shake the guilt! Three, if it is something that you are slightly hesitant about, don’t buy it! Return the next day if you are still thinking about it, maybe at a different time of day, and see if it still speaks to you.

Give yourself some time to browse at Belizeans Arts; they have LOTS of artwork from all over the country, including beautiful jewelry and accessories. Belizean Arts is located inside Fido’s Beach Bar on Front Street, San Pedro.





CHAPTER XXIII. Stroll the San Pedro Artisan Market



While you will find quite a few folks selling crafts around town, I find it easiest to just browse and admire the souvenirs all in one place - the San Pedro Artisan Market.

You can breathe a sigh of relief. This isn’t one of those sprawling endless markets with booth after booth of the same exact stuff. In a clearing on Back Street, you’ll find a U-shape of covered stalls with about 15 or 20 merchants selling crafts and souvenirs.

Some of the items are made in Guatemala, some are probably made in China, but you can find a nice selection of baskets and hardwood carvings, conch shell art and knick-knacks all from Belize. Last time I was there, I got some very cute metal Belize bicycle license plates (that look great on my Christmas tree), a hammock at a great price and a tiny turtle basket handmade in Southern Belize. Did I need any of those things? No. But six months later I still like them all.

What differentiates this market from some others that I’ve been to (CANCUN) - is that the sellers are relatively easy going, happy to share details of their crafts and its origins, and take “no” for an answer. On that last trip, I actually spent way longer than I had planned, to chat with a lovely gentleman about zericote wood - the merits of that grown on the mainland vs the zericote from the cayes.

Open 7 days a week, the San Pedro Artisan Market is located on Back Street in the “Old Football Field”.





PART IV





Learning is Fun





CHAPTER XXIV. Visit Marco Gonzalez Maya Site



Belize’s official National Institute of Culture and History website states that the Marco Gonzalez Maya site is “located about 2 miles south of San Pedro Town”. That is definitely not so.

5 miles south of San Pedro town is the island’s only official Maya site; there are estimated to be about 20 more scattered all over the island. Officially discovered in 1984 (though some islanders were aware of it long before then), the partially excavated site is set deep within the mangroves on the very southern end of Ambergris Caye.

Ideally, you can head down to the area on a breezy, dry day in the midst of the driest season (January to April) when mosquitos are at a minimum. The drive can take you over an hour from town depending on the state of the sand road. The far south is beautiful and the ride is part of the adventure. Large houses, empty beachfront lots, interesting signs - like the entrance to the Hotel California - and more.

Make sure that you have enough gas, water, proper shoes (sport sandals or sneakers) and bug spray. There is a very cool boardwalk winding through the lagoon and mangroves - a great spot for birding - and then the site.

Do not expect lofty pyramids (the highest mound is perhaps 15 feet high) but DO expect to find artifacts scattered all over the ground. The ground is literally covered in shells, broken pottery and...bone fragments. We found a section of a human spine when we were there. If you just thought “COOL!” - you want to head down to Marco Gonzalez.

Located at 5 miles South Ambergris Caye. The road is paved from town to about 2.5 miles south - the last half of the drive will be on the sand/dirt road. During the rainier season, this road can be ROUGH.

If you want to see/climb large pyramids and admire beautiful Maya carvings, consider a day trip to the Lamanai site in Northern Belize. It’s a FULL day trip from Ambergris Caye - boat pick-up at your hotel or closest dock to take you to the mainland - but it’s worth it. The site is seriously awe-inspiring.





CHAPTER XXV. Painting with Melody



My friend Melody is a mother of three, an event and wedding planner, an art shop and art studio owner, a former Belikin calendar girl (she is cringing as she reads this) and a fantastic artist. But here is perhaps the most impressive gift that Melody possesses: she makes YOU believe that you’ve got artistic talent.

She has a great gift shop called Belizean Melody Art Gallery on Front Street, and a few miles north of town she has a painting studio and tiny gift shop where she hosts painting events, so you can take home a very personalized souvenir. Melody and her team will arm you with everything that you need - brushes and paints, an artistic example and most importantly, precise directions on how to make your own. And if you want...some instructions to add your personal artistic flair. I have a perfectly-acceptable peacock AND a pretty-darn-good flamingo - both of my own making - on display at home to prove that it is possible. Not in a prominent spot mind you - but they are there.

Melody and her art team hold weekly classes in her studio - check out her website PaintNSplash.com for schedules, examples, and pricing information.

She can do special classes for kids and families or for small groups (with or without wine), or you can catch Melody or her assistant at one of her weekly out-of-studio classes.

And if you are certain you have no artistic talent and that even Melody, combined with the relaxation of Belize and a few glasses of wine, can’t coax skills out of you, stop by her gift shop to check out the made-by-others Belizean treasures.





CHAPTER XXVI. Learn to Make Chocolate with Belize Chocolate


The Maya - the original people of Belize - were some of the first people to cultivate cacao beans over 2000 years ago. The beans were used for centuries before Europeans got hold of them and added milk and refined sugars to blend what we now know as chocolate. The Maya ground the beans into savory drinks, used them as currency for trading, and even fermented the beans for cacao wine.

Cacao is now primarily grown in southern Belize, but the very best chocolate in the country is made right here in San Pedro. It is not my bias; I have tested it EXTENSIVELY. Belize Chocolate Company makes some of the best, most flavorful chocolate I have tasted anywhere. The dark chocolate is fruity and rich, almost like raisin...even the white chocolate is delicious, not overly sweet. And I don’t even like white chocolate!

Jo and Chris, the husband-wife team and owners of the chocolate company, came to Belize from the UK about 20 years ago. They developed a passion for chocolate and a real knack for flavors and combinations that focus primarily on the products of Belize.

Try daily flavors like Banana Caramel or the Milk Chocolate Coffee ganache or weekly specials like White Chocolate with Coconut Rum filling.

During the week, Chris and his team teach a Chocolate making class - where you make and taste chocolate at every stage of production. From the bean to the bar - it’s intriguing how complex chocolate production is. Very hands on...kids and adults will enjoy this 30- to 40- minute course.

Most people return to this shop again and again during their vacation (my best friend Jamie likes to visit each day of her summer stay) - for the chocolate chip cookies, milkshakes, souvenirs, or just for the intoxicating smell of the shop.

Belize Chocolate is located on the south end of Front Street just across from the RC Primary School. For information, see their great website BelizeChocolateCompany.com.

Bonus information: Honestly...you can’t go wrong in here. The cheesecake and torte, both served in four- bite slices drizzled with chocolate sauce, make SUCH a delicious little afternoon treat. Try them with the Chocolate Tea - hot or iced - sit on the outside deck by the ocean or enjoy the AC and Wi-Fi inside. Belize Chocolate Shop is a sweet-smelling oasis on a hot day.





Tip: Another cool spot on a hot day - one that begs you to linger for even longer - is the small, locally owned coffee shop called Lavish Habit. The real-deal coffee is fantastic whether you try a hot latte or a flavored iced coffee. Nayomi and Rafael have a great snack and lunch menu that includes warm waffles with banana and Nutella and an assortment of warm paninis with chips. I’m not suggesting you spend your vacation inside sipping coffee but if you were, this is the place to do it. Lavish Habit is located on Front Street north of Central Park.





CHAPTER XXVII. Golf Cart Birding




Belize has an AMAZING array of birds. And while many of the showstoppers, like the three varieties of toucan and the showy scarlet macaw, are birds spotted only on the mainland of Belize, this island has some beauties all her own.

Stop right there! If you are thinking SNOOZE right now, or worse, thinking NERD! - don’t worry. I’m not suggesting that you strap on binoculars and head out into the bush for a full day of birding. I’m only asking that you take a look around when out and about walking or on a golf cart. ALL of the coolest birds that I’ve seen, I’ve seen along the road or perched in trees along the roadside. Just keep your eyes and your ears peeled.

During the winter and early spring months, lots of beautiful wading birds migrate down for the warm weather. You’ll see hook-billed ibises, pink spoonbills, herons of all sorts, egrets and even huge wood storks.

All year round, listen for the shriek of parrots and parakeets. Flocks of olive-throated parakeets can be seen all over the island. And twelve years into living on Ambergris Caye, I too shriek each time I see them.

Even if you plan to spend your vacation in close proximity to your resort, there are some amazing avian residents that you can easily admire.

The soaring frigate bird steals much of his food from other birds since frigates do not have waterproof feathers and can not land on water.

Or the dive-bombing American White and Brown pelicans - they can spot fish from as high as 50 or 60 feet above the water.

If this intrigues you at all, download the app Merlin on your phone. Or grab a copy of the book, “Birds of Belize” on Amazon before you come down. There just might be a birder in you!





PART V





Like a Local





CHAPTER XXVIII. Pick up Hitchhikers on Ambergris Caye



I’m guessing, since it is 2019, that “picking up hitchhikers” is not on your regular list of activities at home. But on Ambergris Caye, I am a HUGE fan of this otherwise taboo activity for one main reason - you can easily chat with someone that you might not normally meet. Bumping along in a golf cart, exchanging names, where you are from and perhaps a bit of small talk...it’s a great way to learn about local life while doing someone a favor.

A little explanation first. Though you will see golf carts EVERYWHERE on Ambergris Caye, they are often a luxury item for those who live here. A new golf cart can cost $30K bzd or more. FOR A GOLF CART! And as the island grows and development spreads out, you’ll find that lots of school kids and adults heading to work need a lift along the road.

Please use all the common sense that you would anywhere else. If you are alone or it’s dark or even if you are in a rush, there is no need to stop. In fact, I’d keep this as a strictly daytime “activity”. If you don’t want to stop, there is no pressure. It is quite acceptable to keep driving.

But if you are with someone and feel comfortable, pick up those little uniformed cuties on their way to school. If only for selfish reasons - that hearing them sing “THANK YOU MISS” as they jump out makes me very happy. Each and every time.

Should I rent a golf cart on my vacation? It’s one of the top questions that I get from those visiting Belize for the first time. And the answer is...probably.

Ambergris Caye is such a popular vacation spot because of the large number of options. Different areas of the island, different beach bars and restaurants, shops and activities - you can get some sense of it from this book. If you are 100% sure that you ONLY want to relax at your resort, then you will not need one. But if you aren’t sure - and this list intrigues you, rent a golf cart for a few days. And see how it goes.

There are countless spots to rent a golf cart - ask your hotel or resort which one they recommend. And remember to always have your license with you, to never park at a red curb in town (you’ll get ticketed), and to always lock your cart when you are not using it. Most golf carts have a universal key that will start pretty much every cart on the island.





CHAPTER XXIX. Buy A Gallon of Fresh Coconut Water



WAY before the first tourist ever hit Belize’s shores, some of the original settlers came to Ambergris Caye to work in the burgeoning coconut industry. Copra was the export - husk and shell of the coconut removed, the meat was dried in the sun and shipped abroad to make coconut oil. For decades, tons and tons of the stuff were shipped off-island to the US, ending in the 1930s when coconut oil went out of favor and the San Pedranos turned to the fishing industry. (Tourism still wasn’t on the radar - the first tourist hotel would open a few decades later. Celi McCorkle would open her Holiday Hotel with only five rooms in 1965.)

While the coconut industry for export has stopped, coconut has always been a big part of cuisine all over Belize. And interestingly enough, the whole world has just come on board again in the last decade. You’d almost think that beauty bloggers and health nuts invented coconut water and coconut oil recently...but Belizeans have been using the coconut, in so many forms, for hundreds of years.

My very favorite way to consume coconut is fresh coconut water. As you travel around the caye, watch for someone on a bicycle with heavy one-gallon plastic containers dangling from his handlebars. The cloudy liquid, often with chunks of young coconut meat, is fresh gathered coconut water. Usually collected in the last few hours and almost always for sale.

Hail him (in Belize that means wave him over) and ask. $12-15bzd should secure you a gallon of nature’s perfect juice.

Did you know it can take anywhere from 10 to 20 coconuts to make one gallon of coconut water?

Tip: You’ll absolutely need to refrigerate it first - you always want to drink coconut water COLD. It’s delicious and can last you the whole week. As tempting as it is, ease into it. Coconut water is SO good for you...so fiber filled...




CHAPTER XXX. Try Something New at A Local Fruit Stand



You might be surprised to find that there are relatively few fruits available all year round in Belize. These “year-rounders” are banana, pineapple, watermelon, papaya, and orange; each is gorgeously sweet - most likely picked just about ripe and in your fruit stand just a day or two later. But most of our fruits are seasonal - and since imported produce is seriously limited - you’ll only see tropical favorites like avocado or mango for just a few months a year.

One of my very favorite things to do is to buy a fruit or vegetable I’ve never seen before. There are all sorts of fresh fruits that you’ll only see on the island for a few weeks a year. Example...the soursop (in Spanish, guanabana), which tastes like a Lime-Strawberry Starburst and is the favorite ice cream flavor in Belize. Or the custard apple (Spanish, cherimoya), which tastes like creamy sherbert. Always ask the vendor lots of questions - “How would you eat this?” is one of the best.

But it’s the things that are sold in small bags by fruit vendors that really give you a taste of Belize. Small bags of chopped fruit or veg that are eaten as snacks. In Belize, many fruits and raw veggies are considered bland...practically naked without the zing of lime, a sprinkle of mixed salt and “chile” or dried habanero flakes. You’ll see school kids swarming the vendor outside their school gate during breaks for things like grosella or green mango or plum (definitely not the plums you are thinking of). They are all puckeringly sour and then spicy and salty with perhaps a hint of sweet.



Maria and her fantastic fruit, vegetable, juice, advice, cheek-pinching and good conversation stand south of town



The simple combination - I’ve even seen the salt and chile eaten on watermelon and coconut - just might change your way of eating forever. You’ll exclaim out loud: WHERE has this flavor profile been all my life! Or you might just like it on a few things - I adore it on slices of cucumber or jicama. Either way. Try it. It’s fun.

Note: To express the superlative form of an adjective - Belizeans often repeat it. For example, instead of “this mango is the sweetest” or “this mango is very sweet”, you will hear “the mango is sweet sweet”. Or nice nice. Perhaps fresh fresh.





Tip: When you are cooking for yourself or just stocking your refrigerator, the best fruits and vegetables really are the local ones. You can find imported apples and sometimes pears and peaches and they hit the spot if you are really craving them but they are often expensive - 2x -3x the price that you’ll find at home and...well...older. Something like a nectarine or a strawberry - more perishable fruits that are imported - are generally not so good. Don’t waste your money, and embrace that you came to Belize for Belize and her fruits.





Just stop where you see fruit and vegetables on display. There are lots of vendors on Back Street in town or if you are staying south, make sure to stop in and see Ms. Maria and her cat, Mama located at about 1.5 miles south.





CHAPTER XXXI. Peruse the Pacas



When it comes to packing for Belize, I would absolutely say the fewer clothes packed, the better. I’m not saying that in a creepy way, only that you will find that just the basics - like lightweight t-shirts or tanks, one or two pairs of shorts - will be all that you need. You can find my more detailed Packing List on my website. Just remember that the weather on Ambergris Caye is reliably warm and the dress code, reliably casual.

But if you find that you forgot something - or just like to look through vintage (the fancy term for “used”) garments, San Pedro is your spot! In fact, over the last 10 years or so, there has been an explosion of “pacas” across the town.

Pacas - Spanish for packages or bales - is the general term for the used clothing stores. Huge bales of used clothing come down from the States - so many that I hear there is an airport hangar for sorting and storage - and are then sold throughout the country. They sell EVERYTHING. From undies to bathing suits to US Army uniforms to cotton t-shirts and gym wear and shorts that actually fit me. You just need to search through the racks! Most of the shops advertise new shipments - NUEVA PACAS - for Saturday morning. If you get there early, there can be quite a scrum for the good stuff.

I’m not advising you to spend your vacation in a used clothing store. But if there is a sudden “cold front” - where temperatures in the winter can dip into the low 70s - or you forgot a rain jacket and the weather turns rainy for a day or two, I’d hit the pacas. For about $15bzd or less, you can walk out with a sweatshirt (possibly emblazoned with a Kentucky High School basketball team logo) that you won’t feel guilty about if you have to leave it behind in Belize.

I’ve daydreamed about opening my own curated pacas store - just the good stuff of course. I’d call it Neiman-Pacas after the famous American luxury department store, Neiman-Marcus. The logo! The merch! And then I remember that I’m not a very good shopper...short attention span. Oh well...

Prices start as low as $1bzd at the Pacas stores that are easy to spot and located all over the island.





CHAPTER XXXII. Celebrate a Unique Island Holiday




Belizeans really love a good celebration - and due to the multi-cultural-ness of Belize plus the British AND American influence, there are plenty of holidays and festivals to enjoy.

Easter and Christmas, New Year’s Eve and even Halloween are BIG on Ambergris Caye, but I want to highlight a few of the annual celebrations that are very Ambergris Caye-unique.

Carnaval - Influenced by Yucatan traditions, Carnaval is celebrated on Ambergris Caye in the days leading up to Ash Wednesday. Like Mardi Gras in New Orleans or Carnival in Rio de Janeiro, it’s the big crazy party, a chance for people to go a bit wild before Lent begins.

Ambergris Caye’s unique spins on the celebration include Comparsas - Men dressing in costumes as women and women as men and then dancing in small groups on the street for charity. The holiday is also a huge paint party. Sunday, Monday and then Fat Tuesday, kids and adults fill up squirt bottles of paint and cover each other in color. Head to toe. So fun and SO different.

Lobster Festival - Lobster was considered “junk fish” on Ambergris Caye in the 1920s but a few decades later, with the arrival of a seaplane that could transport the crustacean on ice to the United States, things changed quickly. And fishing, especially lobster fishing, became the way of life on Ambergris.

That seems crazy now. I mean...who doesn’t like grilled lobster with a bit of butter? What was once junk is now a delicacy...a treat...and San Pedro holds a week-long party to celebrate the shellfish.

Note: Belize’s lobster is spiny lobster, also called a rock lobster, and is a whole different genus from her northern cousin, the Maine lobster. These warm water guys have longer antennae and no claws and are said to be a bit less rich, a little less sweet than the Northern lobsters. Like any food, it’s all in the preparation. And done right, spiny lobster is DELICIOUS.





Lobster season opens on June 15 each year and closes on February 15th of the following. San Pedro’s LobsterFest kicks off the Saturday on or before June 15th and culminates with a huge Block Party in the center of town on the Saturday at the end of that week.

September Celebrations - Steeped in tradition and culture, I am always stunned to be reminded that Belize is technically such a new country. We gained independence officially from the UK on September 21, 1981. The Queen of England is still the head of state and our Prime Minister is the head of government. Queen Elizabeth II can be seen on all of our paper currency.

September - with a national holiday on the 10th and the 21st becomes almost an entire month of celebration. Spelling bees, contests, parties, pageants (like the very well attended Miss San Pedro) and parades. My favorite day of the year on Ambergris Caye is the 21st when the town holds the Jump-Up Independence Day parade.

It’s invariably one of the hottest days of the year - so hot and humid that a brief shower is generally expected - but MAN is it fun. Music, dancing, costumes, towers of speakers blasting festive dance music from floats, government officials throwing candy for the kids. My heart practically explodes each year - or maybe that is the heat exhaustion. The parade fills me with so much love for Belize. Don’t forget your red, white and blue. (And if you do, you can hit the pacas!)





CHAPTER XXXIII. Cheer On One of Our Local Sports Teams


Nothing melts down cultural barriers like joining the crowd at a sports event. Buy a ticket at the front gate, (usually $5 to 10bzd), sit down on the San Pedro side and start asking questions! I always find that the one thing that fans love as much as their team is TALKING about their team. And even if you aren’t really into sports, try it anyway...especially basketball. I don’t know much about the official rules and regulations of the sport but I LOVE the almost overwhelming barrage of sights, music, excitement and the fast pace. It’s also a great way to learn to trash talk in Kriol and Spanish.

Note: While English is the official language of Belize and taught at all government schools, most Belizeans speak Kriol and/or Spanish at home. Spanish is no surprise. Belize is surrounded by large Spanish speaking countries - Guatemala and Mexico. (Populations of about 17 million and 129 million vs. Belize’s 375,000)

Belizean Kriol is a fascinating language all its own. Some call it “slang English” or heavily accented English - but that is just a piece of the story. There are different words and pronunciations, phrases and sayings making it such a unique language. After 12 years on the island, I can understand most of it if I concentrate, but I can travel to Belize City and understand almost nothing. I just smile and nod my head.





In San Pedro, we have two semi-pro sports teams that play in the Spring and early Summer - some players get paid but most do not and have other full-time jobs. The National Elite Basketball team called the San Pedro Tiger Sharks and our football (soccer to my fellow Americans) team, the San Pedro Pirates FC. BOTH teams were Belize nationwide champions in 2019. WELCOME TO OUR HOUSE!

The Tiger Sharks generally play in the evening at the San Pedro High School arena. Competing against teams like the Orange Walk Running Rebels and the ‘Griga Dream Ballers, tensions can run high, especially as the season progresses. The games are quite physical and lots of fun to watch. Make sure to get a t-shirt! GO TIGA SHAAKS!

Our San Pedro Pirates FC play at the dazzling new football field south of town. These are generally Saturday or Sunday afternoon games - and you can check their Facebook page for the details and times.





CHAPTER XXXIV. Crossfit at One of THREE Local Gyms




Perhaps you thought Crossfit was a strictly American cult...I mean passion. Not at all. In fact, you might be surprised to find that Ambergris Caye has three gyms (or “boxes”) totally devoted to this crazy, fun and intense workout. And the majority of the participants are Belizean and residents of all ages. It’s a really great way to meet those who live here. Bonding over a grueling workout in the Caribbean heat.

One of the gyms even has a Crossfit class for kids. Think more relay races and less 300 lbs barbells.

The three spots for the “sport” are located around town. You can find them all online. Crossfit Wolf, Crossfit San Pedro (WOD Zone) and San Pedro Barbell.

For those who prefer working out in a more standard environment or one with AC - we have two spots with all the machines - treadmills and Nautilus - as well as free weights. And AC. Did I mention that?

You won’t have the intense feeling of foxhole camaraderie that crossfitting brings, but they are both great. Check out Belize Fitness and Train Station Fitness Club.

All can be found on Facebook.

Note: Facebook tends to be the spot most used for both business and personal information and communication on Ambergris Caye. Many restaurants and shops don’t have websites, but they will have a Facebook page.





PART VI





Help the Island





CHAPTER XXXV. Trash Pick-Up With the Phoenix Resort



When you were planning super-fun vacation activities, picking up trash probably wasn’t high on the list. But the ocean seems to be where much of the world’s junk is ending up - and Belize is no exception. And like other places, some of it ends up on our beautiful beaches.

The Phoenix Resort - a gorgeous, modern oasis on the north edge of San Pedro town doesn’t stick their heads in the sand when it comes to beach trash, they engage their guests, their employees and the whole community to help pick it up every Saturday morning at 8 am. There is no pressure. Put in half an hour or longer whether or not you are staying at the resort.

Meet on the beach front by the Phoenix and you’ll see the crew. They have what you need - gloves, bottled water and trash bags - and will be really glad to have your help. It’s a fun way to meet people and a good way to see how small actions - good and bad - can affect us all.

For more information on the clean-up and photos of this gorgeous resort, see their website, thePhoenixBelize.com.





CHAPTER XXXVI. Walk A Saga Dog At Belize’s First Humane Society




You cannot visit Ambergris Caye without meeting, and perhaps falling in love with, at least a few dogs. I moved to Belize an unabashed Cat Lady - and now have THREE Belizean dogs. And about once a month, I earnestly consider getting another.



Our most recent SAGA adoption is Frances. This potlicker (we speculate a corgi-chihuahua-hunting hound blend) was very quick to adjust to a life of leisure and regular meals



SAGA Humane Society, the first volunteer-run, donation-driven humane society of its kind in Belize, has been working hard to take care of the animals of the island for over 15 years.

The island dogs are called “potlickers,” and in my estimation are some of the best dogs on earth. Scrappy and smart, they tend to be mild-mannered and easy going. They will ask for food but not beg. Watch how some will take an offered piece of burrito, delicately unwrap it for the meat, and leave the tortilla behind in the sand. Now we only need to teach them to properly dispose of their trash.

So why not show the love by taking one, two, or more of the residents of SAGA’s Fort Dog (the long-term lodging at the humane society) out for a beach walk? Let them stretch their legs and perhaps do a bit of prancing for a prospective new owner.

The dogs at SAGA are so crazy excited to see you, so beside themselves to get out for a walk, manners just might fly out the window.

Head to the main office and grab a leash or two from the front desk and head out to greet some very happy dogs.

SAGA Humane Society is located south of town - about a 15-minute walk or a 5-minute ride - just one block off the main road. Expect a few paw prints on your clothes...and maybe a bit of enthusiastic slobber but lots of happiness. Check their hours on their website SagaHumaneSociety.org.

Bonus information: It is relatively easy to adopt a dog in Belize. If you fall in love with one of the adoptees at SAGA Humane Society, just ask at the front desk. You really just need some simple paperwork.





Something to notice as you drive around town: San Pedro went from tiny village of a few hundred people to a sprawling busy town in less than 40 years. It’s not uncommon (though not necessarily advised) for people who live in town to let their dogs lounge on a side street or wander a bit during the day.

You’ll notice quickly that many of these dogs are better at crossing the road than most humans.

You might see Sally, the beautiful blond potlicker, who shifts with the sun by Ambergris Sunset Hotel on Back-a-Back Street. Or “Eye Brow” dog - sometimes in an old t-shirt, sometimes not - lounging on the bottom shelf at the fruit stand just south of Castillo’s Hardware Store. (“Lounging on the bottom shelf” might make you think he is a Chihuahua but Eye Brow is a 75+ lb mix). There is a very sleepy yellow dog called “Hol Chan Dog” who sleeps in front of the Hol Chan offices.

See if you can spot them too or name some “regulars” yourself.





PART VII





Make it A Day





Before I send you off on “DIY Day Trips”, I want to give you an overview of our island and how big it really is. There are over 400 cayes off the coast of mainland Belize and Ambergris Caye is the largest in population and in area. By a long shot.

Ambergris (named after a rare waxy, stinky excretion from sperm whales that floats up on shores and is used by the perfume industry) is over 25 miles in length, up to 5 miles wide, and runs north to south along our barrier reef. San Pedro town and the majority of the population live on the southernmost quarter of the island; the northernmost tip (and the widest part of the island) is a vast national reserve called Bacalar Chico National Park and Marine Reserve.

The east side (windward or reef side) and west side (leeward or “backside”) are also very different. The east side has the barrier reef, the roads, the resorts and homes, the people, the town, the development and, for the much of the year, the incoming sea breezes. The wind almost always blows in from the east. The west side has only recently “opened up” with a road running across the island to the area called “Secret Beach” (see the map section). Shielded from the open ocean and the wind, the water on the west side is shallow and crystal clear.

I just wanted to get that straight. Now let’s begin!





CHAPTER XXXVII. Lounge at Rojo Beach Bar




Located at about 5 miles north Ambergris Caye, Rojo Beach Bar and Lounge has been called “one of the top beach bars in the world”. IN THE WORLD? Yes. The mix of beachy casual and lounge-chic makes it a very memorable spot to spend a long afternoon.

Follow the signs and turn off the main road into a bit of jungle. A few twists and turns and you may ask yourself if you are headed in the right direction...then you’ll see the entrance. The aqua blue of the sea, white sand... it’s like entering another world.

This “hidden” beach bar is set on a beautiful, long stretch of ocean. Nestled just above the beach is a thatched bar, a sprawling covered deck and lounge with lots of cushioned seating, a small but swanky infinity pool, and all sorts of hammocks and seating nooks that ensure that Rojo rarely feels crowded.

It’s the tasty food, including artisan Lobster and House-Made Bacon Pizza (my fave); delicious Asian dumplings and noodles; imaginative drinks; and games like beer pong, jumbo Jenga and corn-hole, that can keep you busy all day long if the perfect view grows tiresome.

Say “Hi” to the oh-so-instagrammable rainbow macaw parrot, Keppi, who is generally holding court just by the bar.

Rojo’s prices are on the higher end, but I think you’ll find the luxe surroundings make it worth your while.

Rojo Beach Bar and Restaurant is located about 5 miles north and has slightly irregular opening times. Check their Facebook page for more information.

Rojo is so cool that in 2011, when the TV "Reality" show, The Bachelor was filming in Belize, the final rose ceremony took place right here. Remember Bachelor Ben Flajnik? Yeah...me neither.





CHAPTER XXXVIII. Yoga and Swim at Ak’Bol Eco-Resort



Ak’Bol Eco-Resort is located on a large, lush beachfront property about 1.5 miles north of the bridge. The lodging ranges from rustic seafront cabanas to “village rooms” with shared bathrooms across the street. But for me, the dock is the top attraction. This GORGEOUS long dock ends with a huge palapa-covered deck set over some of the prettiest water on the island.

In the morning, that area is home to yoga with Ak’Bol’s co-owner Kirsten. It starts at 9 am except Sundays when class starts at a very civilized 10 am. Sundays are perfect for those who are beginners or for those who don’t really do yoga at all. It is more about relaxing, slow stretching and listening to the reef and your thoughts. It’s called Yin Yoga - it lasts about 1 ½ hours and is really fantastic.

If you’re sure you have no interest in yoga at all, stop in at Ak’Bol and have breakfast (the coconut French toast and banana pancakes are favorites), lunch or just some drinks. Take your towel and a Belikin out to the dock for a swim. It’s my favorite spot on the island for swimming and just lazing in and out of the sun.

Warm up on the dock, take a dip in the water, order a cold drink from the bar, read under the palapa. Repeat.

See their Facebook page for updates and information.





CHAPTER XXXIX. Golf Cart Drive to Tranquility Bay Resort, 14 Miles North


For decades, most of the development was in or directly around San Pedro town. Things have been changing quickly as more and more people visit the island and the population grows. In 2008, the old pull-ferry was replaced by The Barry Bowen Bridge (the only bridge) connecting the north and south. And then in 2015, the road north was paved - up to Mile 3. A proper paved road! So what was accessible only by boat is now open for golf cart exploration

There are resorts, homes and restaurants scattered along the drive north of the bridge - thinning out as paved road ends and then even more so around Mile 7. But if you are looking for an adventure - keep bumping along. You pass some little beach bars that are worth a stop like Chat N Chill at Mile 9 and El Norte Bar at 10. Between the two, the road will end and you’ll be driving on a path along the beach.

Go slow...the view is spectacular. Tranquility Bay is the last resort at Mile 14. Stop for a beer and ceviche at their GORGEOUS over-the-water bar and restaurant called The Tacklebox. The swimming is fantastic from this dock...and with the reef only a few hundred feet offshore, there are lots of fish to see.

What you need to know: Bring water, your swimsuit, some bug spray, sunblock and if you are so inclined, snorkel gear.





This is NOT a short or smooth drive - you will be bumping along a beach road. It can take up to 2 hours from town to Tranquility Bay depending on the condition of the road.

MAKE SURE YOU HAVE A FULL TANK OF GAS. Your rental company will NOT be pleased to receive the call that you ran out of gas that far north of town.





CHAPTER XL. Find Your Swim Spot in Boca Del Rio



Boca del Rio is the name of the neighborhood and beautiful stretch of white sandy beach that runs from just north of town up to the bridge. It’s always been a very popular hang-out and swimming spot for locals - especially after school and on Sundays.

Just a few years back, this strip of beach front was a sleepy residential area...one or maybe two-story homes, a dive shop and our island’s one high school. (You should see the views from the second floor of the high school - I can’t imagine how these kids get anything done!)

In a relatively short period of time - over about the last five years - it’s changed. Palapa-ed beach bars, over-the-water dock bars, and restaurants have sprung up on every single beach block - taking advantage of one of the island’s prettiest white beaches. You now have a slew of choices but let me describe a few of my favorites for a cold drink, something tasty to eat, and a swim.

I’ll start from the south side (closest to town) and move north towards the bridge. Drive slowly along this beach road (you must...it’s generally riddled with bumps and gullies) - it’s really one of the prettiest drives on the island.

Start with the world-famous Palapa Bar. Just a few years back, this structure was the only over-the-water bar in the area. It’s the original. The model on which the others were built. The huge palapa (that lights up dramatically at night) has a big bar, tons of seating, lots of live music and my favorite part - a pretty epic “swimming hole” at the end of the dock.

Lounge in one of the inner tubes; you can even get your ice-cold Belikins delivered to you via rope and pulley.

Sandy Toes Beach Bar is the local bar everyone wishes they had. They serve great food - the coconut curry is an unexpected favorite, and the wings are said to be the best in town. Eat around the bar, on their small deck admiring the view, or in the ocean. You’ll see the rainbow-colored chairs lining the beach. It’s a super chill beach spot to spend the entire day. Especially if you like your toes in the sand.

Sandy Toes also has a popular live reggae night each Saturday.

Hurricane’s Ceviche Bar has been around for a while but just recently in this new location. A barge actually moved the entire over-the-water restaurant from south of town to its current spot over a pretty blue flat. With lots of levels of decking, it's another great spot to spend the day.

Hurricane’s is known best for two things. Ceviche. It’s one of the only spots in town where you can taste a type of conch when the Queen Conch is out of season. It’s called Horse Conch or locally, “Mymula”. And then Josh, the ridiculously adorable bartender. His family owns the spot. Get him to play the guitar for you! It makes the ladies swoon.

There are other spots in Boca Del Rio to check out - Wayo’s is an extremely popular over-the-water bar with a great mix of visitors and locals. Find your favorite and let me know what you think!





CHAPTER XLI. DIY Fly Fishing



The following is provided by Jeff, full-time resident of San Pedro for over 15 years, fly fishing enthusiast, owner of Cayo Frances Farm & Fly, and my boyfriend.

Belize has long been a "bucket list" destination for saltwater fly fishing enthusiasts. Anglers from around the world visit to pursue bonefish, tarpon and permit, all legally protected as catch-and-release-only here in Belize. And Ambergris Caye happens to be surrounded by some of the most prolific waters and flats in the country. The island is also home to lodges and outfitters going on third generations of fly guides.

So a big question: Does an angler have to do a fully guided vacation to have realistic opportunities at landing fish? Or, do legitimate DIY fishing opportunities exist?

Let me preface the answer by saying that nothing... and this bears repeating... NOTHING is going to replace the skills and knowledge that can be gained from a day on the water with a knowledgeable local guide. A guided day vs. a day of DIY fishing is an apples to oranges comparison. Each offers different challenges and different rewards.

That said, Ambergris offers ample opportunities for anglers to fly fish on their own. With the right gear, a sense of adventure and a bit of patience, anglers can have shots at all three targeted species.


Appropriate gear is a must, a rod/line combo that can handle the wind, and a reel that can withstand the salt. But "appropriate" does not have to mean super expensive. Sure, top of the line rods and reels are gorgeous and perform great but it's amazing how many options exist nowadays for GREAT casting quality mid-priced rods and reels. Besides, it's a poor craftsman who blames his tools.

For bonefish you'll want to bring a 7-9 weight 9' rod, for permit a 8 or 9 wt, and for tarpon a 9-10 wt (note, most all of the tarpon one can find/target WITHOUT a guide are going to be less than say 40 lbs... albeit still a challenge and plenty of fun, but no need for a 11-12 wt.) For reels, you'll want a reel with a strong (preferably sealed) drag that can withstand repeated dunking in the salt, lined with a weight forward floating tropical line (in some instances a line with an intermediate tip can be put to use.) Reels for bonefish and permit should have at least 200 yards of 20 lb backing. Reels for tarpon should have 250 yards of 30-50 lb backing. An assortment of tapered leaders/tippet will round out your setup: 10-12 lb test for bonefish, 12-16 lb test for permit, along with a spool of heavier tippet material and light shock tippets for tarpon.

Flies: We could write volumes on the variety of possible patterns to bring, a book in itself. Rather, we'll offer a few very broad suggestions/guidelines. For bonefish and permit, of vital importance is to have flies, not just in a variety of sizes, (4's, 6's and even 8's), but in varying weights. You'll want some weighted with dumbbell eyes for deeper water, bead chain eyes for shallower water, as well as unweighted flies for the shallowest of flats or for stealthy presentation to spooky fish. An assortment of flies with weed guards is also a must for fishing the reef side turtle grass flats. For tarpon, in addition to tried and true baitfish patterns, bring a handful of surface flies/poppers for the juveniles you can target in the mangroves and backwaters. There's lots of fun to be had fishing pockets in the lagoons at dusk casting poppers to juvenile tarpon (just slather up in bug spray.)

Clothing: The sun is no joke out on the flats. Long sleeve lightweight shirts are a must. Lots of the newer fishing shirts come hooded with a built-in buff which is great. You'll also want a hat and good polarized glasses. Footwear... You will absolutely need some sort of water shoe. Arguably you don't need to run out and get full on flats boot. Neoprene booties with rubber soles will suffice in most situations, as will many "water shoes" ...sandals, not so much, as silt and shells tend to get lodged between your toes and between your foot and sole.

Transportation: Have golf cart will fish!!! Pack a small cooler, strap your sling bag or backpack into the cart so it does not bounce out, carefully balance your rod (rod butt on the dash, rod resting on the seat-back with the tip sticking out of the back), and you're good to go! Chances are you'll pass by like looking carts as you head north, south or west of town.

And where to go? While we're not about to give up our favorite bonefish and permit honey holes, we will break down the island into a few main sections for you and earmark some productive waters.

Arguably nothing determines more where on the island you should fish than the wind. (We like to use Windfinder.com for reliable forecasts.) The prevailing wind on the island is from the east, putting the west side of the island in the lee. So, on the windiest of days, try heading west across the island to the area called Secret Beach (see #42). You won't be fishing here (far too busy); park your cart and go for a hike. From Secret Beach you can walk about 2 miles to the north before you hit a bay too large to traverse; you can wade just as far to the south. Look for feeding bonefish and cruising permit. And on your way back east across the island, drive the road along the lagoon slowly and keep an eye out for rolling tarpon.

On calmer days we suggest heading north. When the graded road ends about 10 miles north of town you can keep going north on a path that parallels the beach. It's a bit of a trek, but the area north of the Tranquility Bay Resort, between Tranquility Bay and Robles Point, has some of the prettiest flats you'll ever find.

Cold fronts: "Cold" is certainly a relative term. Having lived for a decade in Minnesota, it means something different to me than to folks who grew up in San Pedro. But when you see San Pedranos breaking out hoodies and winter coats it means a cold front is here, which means the wind will be coming from the north. Locals call it "together-weather." Now is absolutely the time to fish the east side of the island. From down south to up north, look for tailing bonefish and permit in the calm shallows. Often right before the wind is set to "switch back" fishing can be VERY productive.

Have fun and good grief don't trout set!!!

Tip: For those of you who might be traveling to Belize with the amazing invention of an inflatable stand up paddle board, strap it to the roof of your cart and head south of town, where on the west/back side of the island, you'll find enough bays, channels and mangrove inlets to keep you busy for days.





On Front Street, across from Central Park is the Tres Pescados Fly Shop. Visit here for any last minute flies and leaders you might need, a shirt or hat to bring home and to maybe even glean a tip or two.





CHAPTER XLII. Swim in the Crystal Clear Waters of Secret Beach



You’ll hear it EVERYWHERE - Go to Secret Beach! You MUST go to SECRET BEACH! So much that you’ll wonder how this stretch on the west side of Ambergris Caye - the only one you can reach by road - can be a secret.

Answer? It’s NOT.

In fact, it is probably the most touristy spot on the entire caye. But that doesn’t mean you should stay away. I think the west coast of Ambergris Caye is one of the most stunning landscapes in all of Belize. Clear, still, shallow water with a sandy bottom. PERFECT for kids, families, for those who want to party, and for those looking to just relax. The sunset over the water and the tiny cayes dotting just offshore only make it more scenic.

A bit more about those tiny cayes. The one closest to Secret Beach - is called Cayo Rosario or Rosary Caye. For years it has been known as a nesting spot for birds and one of the top spots for permit fishing in Belize. There are now developers looking to jam over 100 structures on and around the island - jutting out over the sandbars and flats - over seabed that is part of the Hol Chan Marine Reserve. Seabed that should be for all Belizeans. You can read more about the DefendCayoRosario.com battle on the website.

In the distance, beyond Cayo Rosario, you can just make out a line of trees. That is Blackadore Caye, owned in part by Leonardo DiCaprio and a potential site for an eco-resort.

Now back to Secret Beach. There are six or seven bars lining the Secret Beach stretch - some more quiet, some with lots of chairs and lively music. Arrive early and take a few minutes to check out a bunch of different spots.

There really is “a scene” for everyone.

There is one road that stretches across Ambergris Caye from the reef side (east) to the leeward side (west) - and that is the road to Secret Beach. “The Junction” - where you take the road to Secret Beach is 4.5 miles north of town - and clearly marked. It will take you on a raised sand road about 3 miles across the island. Follow the signs and you’ll be there.

Tip: Rent a golf cart for your first trip there. While it is possible to get there by bike, it’s a long, dusty, unshaded, rest-stop-less road. For lots of additional details and pictures, you can check out my guide on the homepage of my website.





PART VIII





Evening Events





CHAPTER XLIII. Hermit Crab Racing at Crazy Canucks Beach Bar


Crazy Canucks Beach Bar is a laid-back spot right on the beach just about a 5-minute ride (or 15-minute walk) south of San Pedro town. Open 7 days a week, morning to night, it’s a great spot to just hang out, drink a cold beer and chat with locals and visitors.

There are almost an overwhelming number of bars on Ambergris Caye, but owners Krista and Rob work hard to differentiate themselves from the pack. The team hosts karaoke, live music, horseshoe tourneys, painting classes (see #25) and more. But the Quirkiest Night of the Week Award definitely goes to Tuesday. Get there a bit early and then at 6:30 pm sharp, line up to bet on hermit crab races.

An obstacle course, prizes, money for you, money for charity, it’s WIN WIN WIN! Rob is the host with the most. Most corny crabs jokes, most enthusiasm, and an incredible ability to keep kids and adults engaged for hours.

Also, check out Crazy Canucks on Sunday afternoons for live music and Sunday Funday. It’s a great spot to meet expats if you are thinking of relocating to Belize - as many do after just a week-long vacation. I could write a whole book on that subject but a few quick if-you-are-thinking-about-relocating-to-Belize thoughts. (1) Belize is not for everyone - no place is for everyone so if you’ve only been here on vacation...no matter how many times, then (2) Rent for a while and see if you love it (3) Get as many opinions, talk to as many people as you can.

Stay tuned for that book. Actually...let’s see how this one goes first.

Crazy Canucks is located about 1/3 mile south of San Pedro town right on the beach. Look for the signs.





CHAPTER XLIV. You Can Not Go Wrong at Truck Stop




In just a few years, the Truck Stop has become a hugely popular hot spot for food and entertainment - day and night. This smartly set up “food truck” park offers great New Haven-style pizza truck (yes, in Belize!), tacos and other Latin foods, an Asian noodle spot, and an ice cream shop with super fun flavors. 18-and-over flavors like Fireball and Peanut Guinness and alcohol-free favorites like Coffee Toffee and Sea Salt Caramel.

Gaze at a perfect sunset view from a great angled dock over the lagoon. Enjoy the hammocks and over-sized games placed all over the property. The bar is always hopping with friendly staff and creative cocktail creations.

You can not go wrong at the Truck Stop. Ever. But here is my “go-to dinner- and- a- movie” plan. Arrive at the Truck Stop about 20 minutes before sunset, check out the trucks, grab a drink and order some food. As you wait - buzzer in hand, head out to the dock and grab a seat for the sunset.

On Wednesday and Saturday evenings, they will show movies projected on a billowing screen by the water. Wednesday is for more adult movies - from new releases to some classics - and Saturdays are for families and kids. Such a fun way to spend your evening.

Truck Stop is closed on Mondays and Tuesday though that might change during the busiest months of the year. They are EXTREMELY good at Facebook - and all of their special events and announcements (there are lots of them!) can be found on their page. Audio-video Trivia is Thursday nights...lots more.

Truck Stop is located about 1.5 miles north of the bridge - it’s impossible to miss. Look for the large colorful BELIZE mural by San Pedro born artist Papo. It’s a fantastic spot for an Instagram photo.





PART IX





Tours Around The Island





CHAPTER XLV. Snorkeling Hol Chan Marine Reserve & Shark Ray Alley



Snorkeling Hol Chan Marine Reserve and Shark Ray Alley should not be missed. Cross off excuses. You can’t afford it? You are scared of sharks? You don’t think you have the swimming skills? You have snorkeled in other countries before?

STOP THE MADNESS.

This snorkel trip is the most popular tour in the country for very good reason. It is awesome...unforgettable...one of the reasons you came. Belize has the second largest barrier reef in the world and the huge array of corals, the sharks, the rays, the turtles...I’ve even seen a manatee at Hol Chan once...it’s incredible. Not to be missed.

You can sign up for this stand-alone trip - a half-day excursion that takes you to the two snorkel stops and back to town or your hotel. Or you can pair it with a trip to Caye Caulker where you stop on the way over to our lil’ sister island (see #50).

You’ll head out with a certified tour guide; they know the currents, all about the sea life and corals and proper safety procedures. Be honest about your abilities. There is no shame when using life jacket assistance - for many, it gives them to chance to relax and enjoy the fish.

Bonus: For those who feel comfortable in the water and love some adventure, sign up for a night snorkeling trip. It’s a TOTALLY different experience - sea creatures that glow, animals like lobsters and moray eels out feeding and the THRILL of swimming in the pitch-black water with your flashlight.





Another Great Snorkel Trip: Mexico Rocks is the newest addition to the much larger Hol Chan Marine Reserve. Since the reserve’s expansion in 2015, the Mexico Rocks area (about 6 miles north of San Pedro town) has been off-limits to any and all fishing, bolstering the number of creatures you’ll see significantly. Mexico Rocks is a broad area of patch reef in waters only 6-8 feet deep. Because it is so shallow, the sun shines through, lighting up the water...almost like a swimming pool but filled with beautiful sea creatures.

Sign up for both trips at your resort or with a local tour company.





CHAPTER XLVI. Charter a Boat For a Trip to The West Side


For most, their first glimpse of the west side of Ambergris Caye happens when they visit Secret Beach (see Experience #42). It is the only spot you can reach on the west side of the island by road. But there is so much more to the leeward side of Ambergris Caye. Beautiful beaches tucked in private coves, white-pink sandbars that barely peek above the crystal clear sea, water that rarely gets more than a few feet deep, mangroved cayes teaming with nesting birds, and even a pink shell scattered shell-bar that I only recently “discovered”.

The only way to really explore this side of the island away from the busy Secret Beach is by boat.

There are many companies and charters that can take you out for the day including a larger, swanky houseboat and newer pontoon boat tours. You can head out on a private charter (often in a local panga) that can take you around to many different locations - even a quick stopover at Secret Beach for some drinks or food at one of the beach bars.

Local Term: A panga is a type of small fishing boat (generally 18 to 28 feet in length) used all over Belize and Central America. They are designed with a high bow - perfect for fishing and throwing heavy nets - and made to pull up directly onto the sand.





I recently tried a tour by a company called Belize BBQ Boats. Let’s call their very unique vessels “donut boats”. A trip in one of the “donuts” can be tailored for your small group - drinks, food, including BBQ ON the boat, morning, sunset...you choose. It’s a fun option for your small group; a unique, private tour to a beach and/or a sandbar - flamingo and toucan inflatables provided. You can find more information - including pricing - on their website BelizeBBQBoat.com.

One thing to note about this side of Ambergris Caye: there is no coral on this side of the island. So while you might find some fish seeking shade under a dock, the real snorkeling magic is on the other side (the reef side) of the island. (See Experience #45 for more information on the best spots.)

For more information on chartering a boat, ask your hotel for their suggestions for exploring the west side of Ambergris Caye.





CHAPTER XLVII. Head WAY North to the Channel that Splits Belize From Mexico


This trip - generally just called “Bacalar Chico” - is the only one that gives you a true sense of how big Ambergris Caye really is. By boat, you will travel all the way up to the Mexico/Belize border - just a winding canal through a dense mangrove jungle. At some points on your trip through, you can touch both sides...or at least Mexican and Belizean tree branches. You are basically going all the way around Ambergris Caye in one day.

Hundreds of years ago, it is said that the Maya people dug this canal between Ambergris Caye and Mexico’s Yucatan Peninsula to shorten the very active route to the ocean that was used for their salt trade. This canal is now called boca de (mouth of) Bacalar Chico.

The entire north end of Ambergris Caye, 20+ miles north of San Pedro town, is the wild, beautiful national park & marine reserve of over 15,000 square acres also called Bacalar Chico. Deep forest, huge lagoons and crystal clear waters - this area is home to countless fish, manatees, deer, parrots, jaguars, ocelots, underwater caves, and hidden Maya sites. While the human population is now sparse, (really just a manned ranger station), it is estimated tens of thousands of Maya lived in this area at one point.

The trip is offered by some of the larger tour companies or you can charter a knowledgeable boat captain to take you around the island at your own pace. You really want someone with lots of experience in the area - there are so many twists and turns and hidden treasures way up north. I recently took the trip with Panny Arceo, a colorful, entertaining, super-guide who has explored and fished this island from north to south and every cove and inlet in between.

We passed through the winding, almost maze-like, mangroved channel dug by the Maya; we spotted eagle rays and two feeding manatees; and, we stopped at a small Maya site, the Bacalar Chico National Reserve Ranger station and museum. We also did a bit of snorkeling, fly fishing and spin fishing for some huge barracuda. We enjoyed a picnic lunch on a deserted, coral covered beach at Rocky Point (about 23 miles north) where the barrier reef touches the land. The day was ours.

Ambergris is huge and wild, mysterious and beautiful. This is one of my very favorite tours.

Tip: Bring and APPLY more sunblock than I did. You can not apply enough on an all day boat trip in Belize.





Ask at your resort or guide services about the Bacalar Chico tour or contact Panny Arceo directly by phone at 602-8906 to set up a tour.





CHAPTER XLVIII. Nighttime Lagoon Crocodile Tour with ACES



ACES, or the American Crocodile Education Sanctuary, is devoted to educating humans about and protecting one of the largest reptiles on earth - the American Crocodile. Headed by Chris and his team on Ambergris Caye, these guys do some amazing work. And in the evenings, they’ll let you be a part of it all.

Bonus: Chris is Ambergris Caye’s version of a young “Crocodile Dundee”. Always dressed in khaki and camouflage, with his good looks, roguish hat, knife strapped to his leg and “could it be Australian?” accent - his passion for Belize and her wildlife is infectious.





The goal of the tour is conservation and you will learn a ton about a shockingly interesting reptile that plays a big part in our island’s ecosystem. It’s the natural top of the food chain, the apex predator, in the lagoons of Ambergris Caye. MY favorite part of the tour is heading away from San Pedro town into the lagoon...soon, you are in almost complete darkness shining your flashlight into the dense mangroves looking for two glowing red eyes. And then you see one glaring back at you . As Chris jumps into the black water, you look at your friends and family and think...what’s our back up plan here? Super thrilling and fun.

If you are traveling to Belize with kids interested in science and animal life, this trip is a MUST. I would definitely recommend this tour to anyone of any age interested in reptiles or even scary movies. The tour leaves as the sun sets and lasts about 2 hours.

Tip: Get to the meeting spot early. Da Office - a bar & restaurant on the back side of town -is a great, on-the-water local joint to watch the sunset and have some snacks.





Contact Chris and ACES thru your resort or directly through their website AmericanCrocodileSanctuary.org for information and to set up your adventure.





CHAPTER XLIX. A Few Ways to See The Blue Hole


The Blue Hole, a giant sinkhole about 40 miles off the coast of Ambergris Caye, is probably the most recognized sight in all of Belize. It’s an incredible natural wonder - a perfectly round, dark blue 400-foot deep cavern surrounded by crystal clear turquoise waters. Filled with stalagmites and stalactites (formed when the area was dry land - millions of years ago) and as intriguing as it is beautiful. The Great Blue Hole of Belize features prominently on those Internet lists for diving enthusiasts (you know the ones) - Ten Dives to Do Before you DIE! SCUBA Divers ULTIMATE bucket list!

The Blue Hole, the surrounding atoll, cayes and reef are more beautiful in person than any silly clickbait Internet article suggests...

And that is true by air or sea. Let me outline both quickly because they are very different trips. Obviously different vantage points and very different experiences. One thing to keep in mind is that both ways are relatively expensive, perhaps a special treat on your vacation.



The Blue Hole on my Tropic Air flight - stunning, hard to believe it is real even in person


Heading out to the Blue Hole by sea is a full day adventure - pick-up at sunrise, snacks, lunch, snacks again and drop off late afternoon. You’ll set out in a larger dive boat - which is able to navigate the open ocean. The first of three diving or snorkel stops is the Blue Hole. From sea level, you can see some of the coral that circles the cavern, but you can’t tell that it is a perfectly circular hole. The trip is more than just diving. There is a lunch stop at the most gorgeous caye called Lighthouse Caye. This caye alone is worth the trip out there. Follow the signs for the bird sanctuary and watch out for giant hermit crabs, some the size of coconuts. Climb the watchtower and you’ll see the nesting red-footed booby birds. See as much as you can of the whole island - it’s very walkable and absolutely STUNNING. I still dream of camping on this tiny caye for a week. Someday...

Additional information: The majority of the people on the boat will be there to SCUBA dive but this trip is just as fun if you are snorkeling. Clearly you will not be able to go as deep as the divers do (they can descend over 100 feet down), but you can snorkel with your own guide. You may see a shark or two at the Blue Hole and the other two stops are absolutely spectacular.


This is the trip where you will see, really see, the Blue Hole. Since it is over 900 feet in diameter, from sea level its looks like...ocean. You can kinda make out a curve of coral but that’s about it. From the air, it’s incredible...almost hard to believe.

The whole flight is amazing. Make SURE you pick a sunny clear day.

You’ll see the coast of Ambergris Caye and islands of all sizes…a shipwreck and the natural magic of the atolls and the barrier reef. Where the ocean drops from sea level to thousands of feet deep in just a short distance...the miracle of tens of thousands of years and hundreds of millions of coral at work. It really is un-belizeable. (I HAD to throw that in this book just once. Just once, I promise.)

Tropic Air has regularly scheduled tours as well as private charters available. See their website, TropicAir.com, for more information.





CHAPTER L. Cruise to Caulker



I am not one to be bossy but I am going to insist on one trip if you visit Ambergris Caye for a week or longer. I’m going to require that you go to Caye Caulker - our “little sister island” just about 10 miles from Ambergris.

Caye Caulker - pronounced “Key CAW-ker” - is a smaller, more Rastafarian-Caribbean feeling island with a vibe and pace all her own. You’ll see the island’s unofficial motto everywhere - “Go Slow”.

While people flock to the larger Ambergris Caye for the huge variety of bars, resorts and activities, Caye Caulker tends to attract more backpackers, more Europeans, and travellers on a tighter budget. A younger, more international crowd in general…

I adore Caye Caulker but I love it MOST as a day trip...or perhaps for a weekend. (They do have some fabulous spots to watch the sunset and, in my opinion, their June Lobster Festival is the best in the country.)

There are quite a few ways to get to Caye Caulker from Ambergris Caye. Here are a few great options. It depends on your budget - if you want to include snorkeling stops (or even go looking for a grazing manatee) - and the amount of time you want to spend. Here are the ways I like to go:

Water Taxi - This is the cheapest. There are two water taxi companies that run many times a day between our two islands. Check the schedule on-line, be there 20-30 minutes before the boat leaves, buy a round-trip ticket, and hop aboard for a 25 minute ride. I use the San Pedro-Belize Express because they have a more robust schedule. You can find them on BelizeWaterTaxi.com.

Sailboat - There are a few catamaran companies that do this trip - sailing along the reef to Caye Caulker, stopping at Hol Chan Marine Reserve and Shark-Ray Alley for snorkeling. It’s a full day - leaving at 9am, arriving in Caye Caulker around noon, you’ll generally be back at your hotel after 4 pm. On Caye Caulker, the catamaran trip generally allows for two hours to explore, eat lunch and then get back on board for some sun, lots of rum punch, ceviche and snacks and for me? A snooze as we sail back. With a little reggae music and the wind whipping through the sail, it’s just about perfect for it.

YOLO Boat Tour - The YOLO boat is a 40 foot “power catamaran” with tons of lounge space in and out of the sun. There is a full bar with crew members making mixed drinks on and off the YOLO menu, breakfast, lunch, snacks, music AND snorkeling. The boat moves faster than the wind-driven cats and will give you a bit more time to explore Caye Caulker. For more information check with their website IslandDreamsTours.com

You might need that extra time because I’ve got some ideas for your time on this little island coming up next.





PART X





Caye Caulker “Things to See and Do” Bonus





Caye Caulker is less than 30 minutes away by water taxi and such a fun day trip. The island is totally walkable - has an even more laid back, Caribbean vibe, some very cool swimming spots and oodles of charm.

I insist that you head over for an afternoon. Here are nine things to see and do. It’s really easy to find your way around Caye Caulker - but like on Ambergris Caye, the easiest way to get around is just to ask for directions. Often that leads to someone walking with you to the spot.

You can really get a great feel for the island in a long afternoon - here are some of my favorite things to do.




CHAPTER I. Feed the Tarpon




Huge, prehistoric looking fish that seem more like sharks jumping from the water to take food out of your bare hand? Yes!

Tarpon are one of three fish considered Belize’s “Saltwater Slam” by fly fishing anglers around the world. Thousands of visitors flock to the Belize cayes and the coast for a chance to land all three - but when it comes to “wow factor”, tarpon are about as cool as they get.

The “Silver King” can grow up to 6 or 7 feet long, breath air above and below water and are covered with large silver coin like scales. And there is a unique “sanctuary” off the back side of Caye Caulker where you can watch 30 or more circling in the shallow clear water.

These guys generally range from three to four feet long and I’ve heard a few stories about why they gather here. Just beneath this dock is the entrance to one of the largest underwater cave systems in the world. Yes! Beneath Caye Caulker! Caverns and tunnels, stalagmites and stalactites, most of the cave system has not been explored. Some think that the tarpon use the hiding spot to breed but more likely, they are using it for shelter and feeding.

It’s SUPER exciting/SUPER scary to bend over the water with a sardine tucked between your fingers and wait…

On most days, you can buy a small bag of sardines at the small hut on the dock for $5bzd and feed these giant fish.





CHAPTER II. Visit the Arts and Craft Stalls



On the main sandy road, as you mosey down towards the Split, you’ll pass some covered stalls displaying art, jewelry and all kinds of crafts. The local artisan is generally sitting right next to his or her goods - and the conversation can be just as good as your souvenir.

I still cherish the coconut carved as a piggy bank I bought here years ago. It would also make a great baby gift. The Caye Caulker Craft Market, the rustic Spongebob in the coconut tree “art installation” and the neighboring “hammock garden” are so scenic...you can’t help but take a hundred photos.





CHAPTER III. Jump off the High Dive at the Split


On Caye Caulker it seems that all roads lead to the Split. The story has it that in 1961, Hurricane Hattie, (which made landfall as a Cat 4 just south of Belize City and caused devastation throughout Belize), cut the island of Caye Caulker in two with her fierce winds and massive ocean surge. Left behind is a deep channel between south Caye Caulker (the most populated part and home to Caye Caulker village) and the north end - the Split.

The area is the island’s most popular swimming area, home to the famous Lazy Lizard Bar & Grill, and Caye Caulker hang-out spot. On any given day, you’ll find half the island’s visitors at the “sunny place for shady people” drinking at one of the partially submerged picnic tables, dancing on the dock and just taking it easy.

This is the ONLY experience in the entire book that I am recommending that I haven’t done myself: Jump off the high dive at the Lazy Lizard into the deep blue waters. Everyone who goes with me does it and loves it. Even my 7-year-old nephew did it. I take a million pictures but I’m WAY too chicken to jump off the high dive.

My favorite spot to take pictures is from the 2nd floor of the Lizard. The view up there...blinding white sand and impossibly bright water is spectacular. But that 2nd floor is as high as I’m getting.





CHAPTER IV. Lounge at Koko King



Koko King is a huge white sandy beach club located on the “other side of the Split” - the only one on this list that you can’t easily walk to. Luckily, they run their own shuttle boat to and from the town center (again….just ask for directions to the Koko-King boat) - it runs hourly.

The 5 minute boat ride will drop you off on one of their two docks. You’ll find a wide sandy beach, clear shallow water, lots of loungers and day beds (for rent), a bar and restaurant, as well as waiter service.

Koko King also has a small boutique hotel on property - perfect for their late night events, like the monthly full moon party that is quickly growing in popularity. Lots of drinks and dance music--- you’re barefoot in the sand with a bright full moon over the Caribbean on one of the most beautiful beaches in Belize.

For more information, contact them via Facebook.





CHAPTER V. Eat Warm Mini-Donuts at Ice n Beans



This might seem odd...in fact, now that I seriously think about it, it is. You are in your bathing suit in the intense sun on a Caribbean island and...yes. I want you to eat warm donuts.

Ice n Beans is small wooden shack with a fantastic view. If you have a sweet tooth, order an iced coffee and a bag of made-while-you-wait cinnamon sugar mini-donuts. Now grab a stool on the tiny porch and spear these warm goodies out of their wax paper bag - it brings me intense joy.

It just does.

Ice n Beans is located on the beachfront by Re/MAX realty.





CHAPTER VI. Unique Craft Shops




Caye Caulker has really cute gift shops that are great for picking up some more unique, handmade souvenirs. Check out the Little Blue Shop - kids at home will LOVE the children’s books series “Caye Boy” about a young boy’s life on Caye Caulker.

Aria Kat Gallery, Boutique and Coffee Bar is located down by The Split and has a great selection of art big and small. Stop by the Caye Caulker outpost of Belize Chocolate (see Experience #26) for a treat and some great souvenirs.

Soaps, spices, t-shirts, art, jewelry - Caye Caulker has one of my favorite selections. PLUS the candy-colored little wooden shops are so cute, you’ll want to take your picture right out in front of most of them.





CHAPTER VII. Covet a Kitten at the Caye Caulker Animal Rescue




What the Caye Caulker Animal Rescue is missing in infrastructure and formality, it makes up for in heart, love and overall cuteness. Located on the main drag - look for the small signs around the front gate. Enter and you might think you are at a half completed building site. But as you look more closely, you’ll see cats and dogs of all ages perched on high and lazing in the sun.

Chat with Kenny who runs the place. He feeds the animals, cares for them, gets them medical care when vets visit the island and best of all...facilitates adoption. All on donations. He is pretty amazing.

Cat cafes may be all the rage in cities in the US, but Kenny has been doing it for years! Stop in for a few minutes or a few hours to cuddle kittens and older dogs and maybe...just maybe...

Information on his shelter and donations can be found at CayeCaulkerShelter.org.





CHAPTER VIII. Rent a Bike and Explore the South End


Much of Caye Caulker can be explored on foot but it’s great to rent a bicycle to cruise to the Southern End of the island.

Once you ride south past the one airstrip (stretched across the widest part of the tiny caye), there are no businesses or shops, the houses are fewer and more spread out, and the island is a bit more wild and beautiful.

Take note of the funky property near the tip of the island that boasts the largest conch shell wall in the world. Has this been verified? I wonder where the second longest is?





CHAPTER IX. Rustle up a Seahorse at the Sea Horse Ranch


A big part of what makes this a Top To-Do on my list is the sign. The very idea of a seahorse ranch is funny to me. And it’s even more intriguing once you see the actual seahorses. Smaller than I thought. Not as cute as I wanted them to be. Odd. Cool. Fascinating.

The Iguana Reef Resort is a beautiful place with a comfortable outside bar and sitting area along the water - the perfect spot to watch an epic Caye Caulker sunset. The resort is very well known for the Seahorse Sanctuary. The actual ranch is quite simple - a bunch of coral rocks, some rope and netting and a sign. But as you kneel down and look closer, you’ll see a seahorse. Or you are supposed to!

I am terrible at spotting them. Not only because they are just about 6 inches long, or because they can change color to camouflage with their environment, but because I am terrible at spotting things in nature. Point to that bright orange bird at the top of a tree? I see nothing.

If you too are stricken with this affliction, just ask someone. Usually an employee of the resort is around to point out these odd fish. Yes...they are fish.

Odd because of how they look, odd because the females deposit their eggs into the male’s pouch so he can hatch the babies, odd as they use their prehensile tails to cling to sticks and ropes, odd because they are fish without scales. Take a look for yourself, buckeroo, and let me know what you think.





Conclusion





Now it’s your turn. Whether you’ve vacationed on Ambergris Caye before or you are planning your very first trip, I hope this book gets you started and, more importantly, gets you EXCITED. To eat, tour, swim, follow local tips, meet people, and explore the entire island. And then let me know your favorite experiences. Honestly, tell me what you loved. Send pictures!


*** END OF THIS TEXT Fifty Big Experiences on Amberg   ***