Title:This Could Be Home  
Author:Pico Iyer 
Gender of Author:Male
Publication Year:2019
Publisher:Epigram
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2019
Publisher of the Edition Used:Epigram
Index Number: B093
Source Link:https://www.amazon.com/This-Could-Be-Home-Tomorrow-ebook/dp/B07WNS7PD6/ref=sr_1_13?keywords=pico+iyer&qid=1671979667&s=digital-text&sr=1-13

*** START OF THIS TEXT This Could Be Home ***

Of course it has to be my first stop on my first day back, after the seventeen-hour flight from San Francisco. But when I arrive at the low-level jewel-case tucked amidst the skyscrapers, it’s to find a line already snaking around the white verandah. There’s been no official notice of the event—no advertisement—but word has clearly crackled around all of Singapore: after nine months of being shuttered, the first public space of the new Raffles Hotel has opened again, three hours ago.

I step out of the blinding sunlight, into the cool and the dark. I might be stepping into my life from thirty-four years ago, on the day of my first visit here. Peanut shells are scattered across the hardwood floor. Gunny sacks and rattan chairs sit under the undulating hula-sway of gossamer-thin fans fluttering from the ceiling. In one corner Elizabeth Taylor, in a large, framed black-and-white photo, appears to be helping herself to a piece of history; in another, Somerset Maugham is taking silent measure of the storied bar in its latest incarnation.

At the far end of the new Long Bar an elegant young woman in a grey suit and high ponytail is shaking up something zesty and strong, here at the very site where the Singapore Sling was invented, one hundred and three years ago. The Sikh doorman, commemorated in photographs on every continent, is seated at the bar, impeccable as ever in his starched white uniform and turban, gold epaulettes gleaming as strangers quiz him about his twenty-eight years of guiding eminences into and out of their chariots. An elderly couple in new-millennium sola topis—floppy white bonnets—sit red-faced from the sun as they take relieved sips of their tall pink elixirs. The sounds of Nagoya and Madrid and Somerset crisscross in the air around me.

A calm sense of festivity prevails—a bottle of Pimm’s beckons just behind the polished bar—and yet, I think, it’s something subtler that offers a sense of release here. To get to the three-storey structure this morning, I’ve had to walk along underpasses leading to passageways, up moving staircases and in and out of shopping malls, through many-storey towers and past convention centres. Everywhere crowds are surging along these linear networks, like pieces of data being transmitted to London or Beijing. When I step out at last into the street, I count twenty-one high-rises poking into the heavens, and just this one intimate sanctuary at their heart.

Within the bar, there’s no sound of traffic at all. I can almost smell the frangipani, the heliconia and bird’s-nest ferns from the four named gardens all around. Through the windows I see green on every side, and the wedding-dress walls of other parts of the hotel, commanding an entire city block. It’s not just the nostalgic furnishings and familiar libations here that take one back; it’s the sense of leisure and rocking-chair ease. In a city that’s all business and movement, here I can feel I’m human again, freed from to-do lists to do anything—or nothing—at all.

A couple of blocks away, temporary stands have been erected for the Formula One Grand Prix. Drivers will be roaring through the old civic heart at speeds approaching three hundred and fifty kilometres per hour. The whole city seems to be moving at a similar velocity, a kind of pace car for the new century, as it races towards its two hundredth anniversary as a global settlement.

But here at Raffles, I’m brought back to something emotional that hasn’t changed in decades, and speaks for what connects us more deeply than anything in Starbucks or Uniqlo. A pop-up shop around the corner is selling the hotel’s coveted Champagne Truffle Snow-Skin Mooncakes, for Mid-Autumn Festival, as famous as the Christmas carolers who gather around the tree in the lobby in December. A temporary gift-shop down the road is ensuring that visitors can return to their other homes, in Bristol or Fukuoka, with Raffles-encrusted tea towels and sugar bowls. Members of the Raffles staff have been showing me photos of the twenty-second-century spaces that are being built only metres away to give the hotel a new dynamism and brightness. Any legend that’s been around for one hundred and thirty-two years knows: it can honour the past only by changing with the times.







Is there any hotel anywhere so inseparably linked with the city around it as Raffles? I’ve been orbiting the globe for forty-five years now, and I have yet to find one. The peace and civility of the hotel offer a respite from the busy city exploding all around it, but the fact remains that you can’t really say you’ve been to Singapore until you’ve stepped through the columned corridors of Raffles. My wife feels she’s done justice to New York even though she’s never set foot inside the Plaza; I’ve been haunting London for six decades, and have never had cause to enter the Connaught. Raffles, however, is something different, the rare hotel that’s not just a base for sightseeing but an indispensable sight in itself. Often, I suspect, people come to Singapore to visit Raffles as much as they come to Raffles to enjoy Singapore.

Even the antic natural historian Redmond O’Hanlon, on his way to confronting head-hunters in the jungle, took pains to specify that it was in Raffles that he opened Smythies’ Birds of Borneo. And the repeat residents who form such a large part of the hotel’s family think no more of stepping out of the place than they would if visiting cousins for the weekend.

The Singapore that’s celebrating its bicentennial as a trading hub for the West as well as the East is more restless, more youthful, more outward-looking than ever; its people earn on average fifty times more than they did when I was a boy. But both city and hotel are keenly aware that, when I was a boy, the first question you’d ask of someone was “Where do you come from?” Now the more relevant enquiry is, “Where are you going?”

Outside, more than six hundred workers have been labouring for four hundred days to bring the institution into a new century. The entire façade has been stripped back by hand, through thirty and even forty layers of paint. “For a building that’s white,” Raffles’ director of marketing Jesmine Hall confesses to me over lunch, with a laugh, “there’s a lot of paint.” Salt that has been encrusted in the building’s pillars since the days when it stood along the sea has been painstakingly removed, a process that takes three weeks. Every one of Raffles’ 886,000 items—antiques, beds, chandeliers, a $120,000 Persian carpet—has been meticulously catalogued and placed into storage, to be taken out again soon.

Since this is a historic monument, not a nail can be removed without the approval of the National Heritage Board. After the hotel reopens, the grandfather clock that stands as steady as the lobby around it (and is perhaps even older) will still be tolling the hours as it has done for decades, and when it strikes eight every evening, you may still hear Noël Coward’s “I’ll See You Again”. The cast-iron verandah and balustrades and cornices—and everything such terms evoke—will still mark out the property as unique. But as the hotel advances boldly into a new millennium, seventeenth-century vases have been auctioned off to make room for a fresher sense of luxury.

The new Raffles is not your grandmother’s Raffles, in short, any more than the city around it is your father’s Singapore. As I look around the Long Bar, I can imagine I’m keeping company with an elegant great-aunt, who’s seated quietly in one corner of a cocktail party, while smooth young executives in expensive suits push themselves forwards to dazzle one another with talk about their futures. The beauty of her presence is that she radiates poise and style and wisdom even when she’s doing nothing. The deeper beauty is that she’ll never be young or old.







A rush of hot air had assaulted me the instant I stepped out of the plane, on my first night ever in Singapore. The tarmac was still black from a recent downpour. I’d never seen an airport so sleek or spotless as Changi, so perfectly a home for visitors from everywhere. But what hit me no less was the presence of tropical darkness inches away from the air-conditioning. As I stepped out into the humid night—bougainvillea all around the perfectly manicured highway—I knew only one name to give the taxi driver as we sped through the night to 1 Beach Road.

I was twenty-seven at the time, a writer on world affairs for Time magazine. Just one night before getting onto the plane, I’d closed a long article on Iran for my bosses, while also completing a cover story for an alternative weekly on the English writer Cyril Connolly. Clearly, I was halfway out the door already. And just five months earlier, I’d made my first trip to Southeast Asia—Thailand and Burma—and fallen under the spell of its spiced ambiguities.

It was 1984, and the first Macintosh computer had appeared on a few desks, with the first TED conference not many months away. But I was being pulled in the opposite direction, towards the night and everything I couldn’t put a name to. On my way to Singapore I stopped in Bali. My first full evening there, a woman I later recognised to be a witch led me out into the unlit lanes, eyes blazing. Everywhere was the smell of clove cigarettes, the dissonant jangle of gamelan orchestras between the trees. The

urchins selling scarves along the road had angel faces, but from the monkey forest down the street came a ceaseless demonic chatter.

I needed to ground myself somewhere that felt solid and changeless, even familiar, and when we pulled up at the three-storey palazzo I’d been hearing about since boyhood, something in me quickened at the sight of the famous fan-shaped traveller’s palms at its entrance. But I also felt as if I were entering several pasts at once, and that somehow they all came together to make the outlines of a future. Here were aspects of my earliest days, among the brisk bedrooms and impeccable lawns of Oxford, mixed with spaces that reminded me of my fifteenth-century boarding-school near London, where the white busts that surrounded us as we delivered speeches in Latin had names that chimed with the Draycotts and Balmorals and Connaughts remembered in 380 Singapore street names.

But here, too, was the world of my parents, growing up in a British India that would not have seemed far at all from the Singapore of the day. I could see my father getting off the train at Victoria Terminus and walking across what looked like a padang—white-flannel cricketers everywhere—as he proceeded to the library near the bell tower at Elphinstone College in Bombay. I could see my mother, meeting with Gandhi as she and her family worked to win their country’s independence. I could picture both of them moving from their tropical home to Oxbridge just as Lee Kuan Yew had done fewer than six years before.

And rising up all around me were skyscrapers that evoked the city to which I’d be returning in a few days, and my twenty-fifth-floor office in Rockefeller Center at a company that people took to be the public voice of the American Empire.

This could be home, I thought, as I looked around. Here was India and Southeast Asia and England and New York all at once. Here was something that brought my past, my present and the future I dreamed of (in Japan) together. I lugged my heavy suitcase to the modest check-in desk, under a huge mural, and found myself looking at the other powerful element in the equation—China—as members of the front desk staff painstakingly inscribed entries in large, handwritten registers.

It was shocking to find that I could stay in Raffles Hotel then for barely one hundred Singapore dollars a night. But Raffles in 1984 was an aromatic attic of fourteen-foot ceilings and slow-turning fans. I wandered to the Tiger’s Tavern bar, where a tiger skin remembered the huge cat who’d strolled into the property in 1902, only to be silenced by a slightly sozzled principal from Raffles Institution across the street. I went out to the Palm Court, where songbirds in cages serenaded me as I took toast and tea for breakfast. The outlines of a charming, but rather antiquated, England reminded me of the time I visited my best friend’s grandmother in Cheltenham: a woman of immense wisdom and wit, but one I could more easily associate with the past than with any future.

The city all around was shooting up as quickly as a studious kid who’d been acing his exams. Singapore as a sovereign republic was only nineteen years old then, and it pulsed with energy and ambition. Around its edges, though, were still delectable traces of a raffish past. I made my way to Killiney Road and came upon a decaying mansion made for sailors and the locals who were more than happy to take care of all their needs; I took a bus around the tree-lined streets of Tanglin and boarded a cable car for Sentosa.

As a boy continuing at school in England after my parents had moved to California, I’d been obliged to have a guardian to serve in loco parentis; my official guardian was a deeply English banker who’d been brought up in what he called “the Argentine”, but had moved in the 1970s to Stevens Road in Singapore.

My first full day in the city, I followed my honorary godfather’s footsteps around the suburbs, and remembered his stories of the places in Chinatown that sold grasshoppers and of the dying souls tucked above the coffin shops of Sago Lane not many years before. These parts of Singapore seemed themselves about to breathe their last.

The room I returned to in Raffles was huge, though bare; it might have been just vacated by a lieutenant-colonel, his memsahib and three officers. And as I watched a mynah swoop down upon a room-service tray, I felt I was in a Botanic Gardens, a British Club, a National Museum and a stately home all at once. I looked out across the lawn to Room 102, where Maugham had sat in the sun and taken notes for the stories that went into The Casuarina Tree. Then I headed out again into the dark, where much of the bustle of six centuries still hung around the port, and men in ill-lit shops swapped numbers as boats came and went in the night.

It hit me instantly that there was so much of everybody’s home here, amidst so much that I couldn’t begin to read. I couldn’t tell how much I was in Bali, how much down the road from Windsor Castle. A writer thrives on what he cannot fathom—what beckons him deeper into the dark—and as I looked across the Palm Court, I felt myself being drawn away from my office on the Avenue of the Americas and towards everything that was less boxed and knowable.

In retrospect, perhaps it was Singapore that helped make me think I should try to become a real writer of books, even if, at first, only an unofficial writer-in-residence in this place of formal façades and rich interiors.

Four years later, I was living in Kyoto, bringing out my first published book—on the distinctly Singaporean theme of how the East and West blur in a slow dance of projections—and, in the same breath, I was losing my heart to a young woman from the suburbs of Japan’s ancient capital. Asia had come to feel like my home, and for an Indian who’d barely been to India—who lived, in fact, in the passageways between places—I felt a real sense of belonging in a city, Singapore, that belonged to many cultures all at once, but wasn’t entirely hostage to any one of them.

Eleven months after I met her, in a thirteenth-century Kyoto Zen temple, I led Hiroko onto her first flight out of East Asia, and we touched down in Singapore. Where better for a woman determined to carve out a new destiny for herself and claim some independence? It was dark when we pulled up at our first stop, and as a tall man in a turban opened the car door for her, Hiroko stepped out into a dream.

“Little movie feeling,” she murmured to herself as I led her into the princely expansiveness of our high white room with its porch and verandah. We went out again and got into a horse-drawn carriage, and clopped down to the port, where there were few lights to relieve the darkness and we could imagine fishermen still working by oil lamps. To this day Hiroko recalls a man in one of the hotel’s public spaces coaxing a cobra out of a basket.

What she was gaining, I began to see, was a sense of everything that lay beyond the world she knew, just as I had, four years earlier. But all presented within an elegance and comfort that could suggest some Platonic ideal of home. More than that, she was seeing a door swing open on her husband-to-be: here was something of the television programme she’d loved about a little Indian boy called Raji and his elephant. And here were all the boyhood memories from England she’d begun to hear about: the clink of spoon on china cup, the thwack of cricket ball near greensward, the thud of ball being hit through small white hoop.

She took her first sip of a Singapore Sling and instantly declared that this would be her cocktail of choice ever after (as so far it has proved to be). A cocktail made for ladies that looks to be mild and inoffensive, but—no coincidence—packs a potent punch.





LIGHTS ACROSS THE WATER


“Goods from all over the East are found here; goods from all over the West are sold here… It is at the end of the monsoons, where you find what you want, and sometimes more than you are looking for.”

—Tomé Pires, a Portuguese apothecary,

on Malacca in 1515





History often resembles a roulette wheel: the small white ball of renown rolls and bounces around till one person, for no good reason, loses everything while the person next to him comes away with a fortune. Official histories are notoriously written by the winners and every age rewrites them in the light of its own prejudices and priorities. But the fact remains that the casino of myth-making allows one figure to have a hospital, an airline business-class—even an enduring hotel—named after him while his hard-working and much-loved colleague is barely remembered.

In recent times, more and more people have begun to point out that 2019 marks the “bicentennial” not of the city’s founding, but only of the arrival of the British in Singapore. Few people nowadays imagine that, as J. G. Farrell had it in a novel from 1978, a “rather vague-looking man in a frock coat” could have “invented” a port known for its pirates and Chinese traders five centuries before. And more and more historians point out that Sir Thomas Stamford Bingley Raffles visited Singapore for barely a month between February 1819 and October 1822, while his resident and commandant, Major General William Farquhar, stayed all three and a half years, overseeing the settlement’s development and effectively ensuring its success. Yet Raffles is celebrated in at least seventeen biographical works (and a musical) and you can feel as if you’re walking through his private playground as you reel in modern Singapore from Raffles City to Raffles Landing to Raffles Quay.

What interests me, though, is how the story of Raffles—and, in fact, of the hotel named after him—prefigures and reflects the modern history of all Singapore. Others have told these stories with more richness and authority than I could muster, so I’ll just concentrate here on the larger outlines: by looking at Raffles’ story, you can see, in effect, the Singapore story as it’s played itself out again and again through very different ages.

The man after whom a Masonic lodge and a chair of history would be named had no family connections, after all, and few advantages, according to his most seasoned modern biographer, Victoria Glendinning; he was born at sea off the coast of Jamaica, on a West Indiaman named for his mother, Ann. And he enjoyed only two years of formal schooling before joining that proto-multinational East India Company. One reason the founders of independent Singapore in the 1960s chose to invoke their British predecessor was that Raffles achieved what he did through stubbornness and vision alone, despite a minimum of resources; another, of course, was that his name reminded everyone that this would be a city for the West as well as the East—not a bad precedent for a nation run by a Cambridge Confucian that would by 2015 play host to seven thousand multinationals and one hundred and twenty-one foreign banks.

Even Raffles’ critics acknowledge that the ambitious adventurer was shrewd to declare that the well-defended harbour, offering access to both the South China Sea and Indian Ocean, be “open to ships and vessels of every nation free of duty”. They also point out how Raffles contributed some of his own money to found a Singapore (later Raffles) Institution dedicated to “literary and moral deportment”, much as the young republic would, one hundred and fifty years later, devote itself to education and the possibilities of international trade.

It was Farquhar who stayed behind to do the hard work of clearing the jungle, building good roads and ensuring the new settlement’s safety and health. It was Farquhar, fluent in Malay, who dressed in a sarong and raised five children in the area, together with his part-Malaccan companion. It was Farquhar, in fact, who is credited with discovering the Malayan tapir. Yet modern Singapore still draws upon the Town Plan that Raffles oversaw, and the hundred-sixty-year-old Botanic Gardens—one of the great ornaments of the Botanic and Experimental Garden that is the Republic of Singapore—is not so far from where Raffles opened a Botanic and Experimental Garden in 1822.

As one of the most vocal champions of Farquhar, the Australian historian Nadia Wright writes, in the conclusion to the preface of a 2017 book, “Suffice it to say that both men were compassionate to the less fortunate, held enlightened views on slavery, valued education and were devoted family men.”

The second aspect of the Raffles story that sounds like a blueprint for the Singapore of today is that, within a year of the British raising their ten-metre flag in 1819, Farquhar was writing to Raffles that “merchants of all descriptions are collecting here so fast, that nothing is heard in the shape of complaint, but the want of more ground to build on”. Within three years, as Wright explains, 1,776 vessels were arriving—from as far afield as South America, New South Wales and France—at a trading post that in 1819 had consisted mostly of rats, centipedes and human skulls, and fewer than two hundred human beings. By 1837 an early visitor to Singapore, George Windsor Earl, was already remarking how “Chinese, Malays, Bugis, Javanese, Balinese, natives of Bengal and Madras, Parsees, Arabs and Caffrees [Africans] are to be found within the circuit of a few miles”.

So Singapore has always known how to turn on a dime and transform itself overnight—even as the more plausible, traditional story of its founding is itself layered in myth. I walk around the National Museum one sweltering afternoon, and I notice the date of the city’s birth is given as 1299, the time, more or less, when a Sumatran prince called Sang Nila Utama—his official name meant “Central Lord King of the Three Worlds”—is said to have spotted its white sands while on a hunting expedition. Glimpsing what he took to be a lion, he renamed Temasek, as it was then called, “Singapura”, a Sanskrit term for “Lion City”.

In truth, of course, lions have never been seen in Southeast Asia, and many have assumed that what the prince saw was a tiger. The thoughtful scholar who’s guiding me around the museum, Iskander Mydin, suggests that perhaps the animal in question was in fact a tapir. But Singapore was spared the Sanskrit name for “Tapir City”, and the prince himself remains a shadowy figure who seems to have stepped out of the half-light of myth.

Legends always enjoy a resilience that realities can merely envy. But as we note how Raffles has been overpraised for generations, we might also remember that when he called the port “my almost only child”, it was partly because he had lost three human children in the space of seven months while the settlement was coming to life. And the ship that went up in flames the night before it was due to carry back to London a hundred and thirty-five huge crates of his papers and drawings and jewels—as well as a living tapir, a new species of tiger and a whole gamelan orchestra—bore, by tragic irony, the name Fame.

Would Raffles Hotel be any less popular if it were called the Farquhar or the Sang Nila Utama? Somehow I think not. After all, lighthouse and country club and museum of biodiversity research all carry the Raffles name around the world, too, and most Singaporeans I meet are much more interested in the future in any case. If it’s true that the largest flower in the world—Rafflesia arnoldii—remembers Raffles, it’s no less true that the ten-kilo plant is a foul-smelling parasite. What’s more appropriate, perhaps, is that the hotel with the unforgettable title sometimes seems to have been named in honour of a village lottery, those familiar raffles that allow a few fortunate souls suddenly to live like kings.







As I walk around the building site out of which the new Raffles is emerging, I can’t help thinking how much the hotel, too, has a story that mirrors that of the metropolis that encircles it. Although many associate the establishment with the British Empire, it’s actually been a profoundly multicultural site ever since it was opened by two Armenian brothers born in Isfahan, Tigran and Martin Sarkies. And although it offers an air of having been where it is forever, in truth it’s been a work in constant progress since the beginning.

Only eight years after Raffles raised the British flag in Singapore—the same year, by chance, that Queen Victoria came into the world—the East India Company lease on Beach Road was given to a friend of his, and one of the settlement’s earliest residents, a missionary called Samuel Milton. Two years later it was bought by a descendant of Sir Walter Scott and developed into a ten-room bungalow, in a row of twenty such structures built along the seafront so British merchants could enjoy grand views and cooling breezes. In 1870, it fell into the hands of an Arab merchant and landowner, Syed Mohammed bin Ahmed Alsagoff, and in 1883 it became a boarding house for the city’s distinguished school for boys, the Raffles Institution.

So the site had served many purposes from its earliest days. Already it had associations with literature, education and many cultures. And although a small building had housed an institution in the same location called Emmerson’s Hotel, from 1878 to 1883, the establishment we visit today really began to take shape when the Sarkies bought it in September 1887, the year of Victoria’s Jubilee. It was their shrewd idea, in a Crown Colony, to name it after the knighted historian of Java whose statue had been erected, amidst much fanfare, less than six months earlier.

As it happens, 1887 was also the year work on the Eiffel Tower began, and the name “Hollywood” was given to a parcel of land in the Far West; on 1st December, the day that Raffles opened its doors for the first time, Sherlock Holmes made his debut in print, in A Study in Scarlet, and a Sino-Portuguese Treaty recognised Portugal’s control of Macao (just two days earlier, the US had acquired rights to Pearl Harbor). There was no Ritz Hotel in Paris in those days, no Pera Palas in Istanbul; for weary travellers after a long journey at sea, Raffles’ provision of “every convenience and hotel comfort” must have shone like a beacon and a rare blessing.

When Rudyard Kipling arrived in 1889, as he wrote in his memorable travel-book, From Sea to Sea, “Providence conducted me along a beach, in full view of five miles of shipping, five solid miles of masts and funnels, to a place called Raffles Hotel, where the food is as excellent as the rooms are bad”. He found there “lazy, languid Englishmen in banians and white jackets stretched on the cane chairs” and noted how far the civil station in Singapore stood from the “native town”.

But Kipling was always keener and more balanced in his perceptions than stereotype imagines. He noticed how everyone in Singapore was already talking about development and observed that “these are unfailing signs of commercial prosperity”. In the suburbs, he registered, “they are building rows of cheap houses; in the city they run over you and jostle you into the kennel”. Here at what he called “the borders of the Celestial Empire”, he intuited that those languid Brits in their cane chairs were already being eclipsed by the industrious Chinese, putting together a new city around them.

The Sarkies’ development of their new property advanced as rapidly as the city itself had done after 1819 in what was fast becoming a Singapore trademark. The energetic proprietors opened two wings, including the Palm Court, in 1894 and six weeks before the turn of the century they completed a new main building, with a three-storey atrium and Carrara marble floors, that could house five hundred diners. Trade coming into Singapore almost tripled in the twenty years after the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, and steamships, newspapers, travellers began to turn the planet into a worldwide web of information.

“You can imagine,” says Jean Wee, director of the Preservation of Sites and Monuments at the National Heritage Board, as we walk along the Singapore River, “you were at sea for weeks and weeks and then you’d see these red lights shining from the pier, from which you would proceed to your hotel.” That same haunting image is exactly the one Jesmine Hall at Raffles shares with me as soon as I touch down from California. In Raffles, after all, every guest is a resident and every resident has a suite that comes with a butler, who can anticipate every need and offer information more gracefully than any Siri or Google.

“Writers were the social media of the day,” Jesmine goes on to note. “They were the ones who got to travel and spread the word about their latest discoveries.” Kipling might have urged his readers to stay at the Hotel d’Europe, but the Sarkies cannily promoted the first part of his sentence—“Feed at Raffles”—and the Hotel d’Europe, opened in 1857, later fell victim to the Depression in 1932 and was demolished to make way for a Supreme Court building. Raffles, like much of Singapore, was also hit hard by the collapse of the global economy in 1929—it became entangled in the largest bankruptcy case in the history of Singapore at the time—but somehow it survived, and soon was opening new chapters in its story.

Singapore as a whole had been the first Asian city to enjoy a telephone network—as early as 1879—and Raffles would soon become the first of its hotels to boast electric fans, electrical lighting and a French chef. It grew famous for its Raffles Dance Orchestra playing the “Raffles March”, its tea dances and fancy-dress parties and cabaret shows in the new ballroom; devil-may-care guests roller-skated across the lobby late at night and fleets of European cars stood ready to whisk residents to every corner of the city. Runners greeted the ships as they docked and private jinrickshas brought guests to Raffles’ entrance; the hotel had its own dark room—its own post office—and when in 1930 an actor fell out at the last moment, Noël Coward took the lead in his play, Journey’s End, which was being put on in the hotel.

Already, it’s worth noting, many were so attached to the mystique of the place that they hoped it would never change; the Resident Historian of Raffles Hotel, Leslie Danker, cites 1870 to 1939 as the “Golden Age of Travel”. By most accounts, he tells me, the absolute heyday of Raffles’ glamour came in 1915, as it was nearing thirty.







There can’t be many hotels anywhere that employ their own historian—though, of course, Raffles outlasts every individual who enters it—and one blistering morning I walk down to the building across the street from Raffles to wander the back streets of memory with the still cheerful and forthcoming keeper of the hotel’s lore. After forty-six years at the hotel—working in every department from security to maintenance to food-and-beverage to the front office—Leslie can’t shake the habit of arriving every morning at 6.30, heating up some coffee and preparing himself for the day to come. With the Raffles staff occupying temporary quarters overlooking their usual home during the recent restoration, he is, appropriately, the first one to arrive most mornings.

Very soon, he’s recalling how the area had looked when he was a boy, making his way each day to St Joseph’s Institution down the road and then, once classes were out, to one of the five cinemas dotted around the central district and commemorated now in the names of five suites in the new Raffles. “All the second-hand booksellers in the area knew me,” he recalls, and everything he needed seemed to be within walking distance. Raffles at the time was not the smallest of the buildings, as now, but the grandest; he could barely dream that one day he might enter. “I used to walk past and think, ‘What’s in here?’”

There had been a sign outside its front door after the war, he remembers, saying, “Only for Officers”. And a place that had hosted Ava Gardner and Jean Harlow and whose bartender, Ngiam Tong Boon, had invented the Million Dollar Cocktail as well as the Singapore Sling could have seemed far beyond the reach of an earnest local student. “When we went to the cinema in those days,” Leslie remembers, “before the film began, you had to stand up and sing, ‘God Save the Queen’.”

The legends that have always gathered around Raffles claim that when Japanese soldiers marched on Singapore in 1942—the British surrendered on the first day of Chinese New Year—they found the British families who had taken shelter in Raffles waltzing around its floor; it’s certainly true they had been singing at times, “There’ll Always Be an England”. Loyal employees of the hotel had been quick to spirit away its precious silver—including the wagon in which the Sunday roast was delivered—and bury it so it could be excavated at war’s end. And after three and a half years in which the place became the Syonan Ryokan—the “Inn of the Light of the South” for occupying Japanese soldiers—it turned into a kind of transit zone and resting place once hostilities subsided.

It’s a liberating irony—a sign of progress, perhaps—that Japanese visitors are today some of the hotel’s most devoted and appreciated guests, second in number only to the British. Sometimes I wonder if the Raffles Gift Shop is in place only to serve up golf towels and stuffed animals to my neighbours around Kyoto. Leslie also remembers how, at war’s end, “Raffles became a hive of activity, as British soldiers released from prison came there and prepared to go back to Britain”.

Leslie’s stories underline how Raffles has constantly been mobile, responsive to the tides of history. He points out how the sea was right outside the entrance, once upon a time, before the city of reclaimed land pushed it more than a kilometre away. He describes how, in the early days, a cast-iron portico was imported from Scotland and the Bar & Billiards Room was elevated, while the ballroom was moved out into the front courtyard. And the overpowering presence of nature that remains one of Singapore’s marvels could never be kept out entirely: I’ve read how large toads would appear behind the huge earthenware jars that guests would use for bathing.

When finally he found the courage to enter, for a drink, Leslie recalls, he was the only non-Caucasian in sight, apart from the waiters; yet when he joined the staff, in 1972, it was to find that, though the majority of the guests were British, much of the staff could barely manage a sentence in English. In those days, he remembers with fondness, every guest’s preferences were recorded by hand, and kept in thick books stored inside a back room; the front gates were closed every night at midnight, and late-night revellers would have to push and clank at the grille to get back in.

“The British had their Navy, Army, Air Force Institutes—NAAFI—across the street from the hotel,” he reminisces. “There’d be drinking and soon there’d be fighting and then they’d try to come into the hotel.” Though movie stars and heads of state would visit—the Grill Room had been renamed the Elizabethan Grill after the coronation of a new British queen in 1953—the hotel was falling into the Miss Havisham state that I remember. Sometimes, Leslie says, the ancient, spring-loaded lift would give out and he would have to crawl underneath and crank it up by hand while stranded residents cried, “Help!”

After the Development Bank of Singapore took the place over in 1972, its chairman was not slow to declare, “The Grand Old Lady needed gingering up.” Lee Kuan Yew, who had enjoyed his wedding reception in the hotel in 1950 and could be seen dining with his family at Raffles, wrote in the introduction to a 2008 book on the hotel, with customary briskness, “In the 1970s it looked shabby…we were not proud of Raffles Hotel.” There were leaks and cracks everywhere, Leslie remembers, but after, in its hundredth year, 1987, the place was designated a historic monument and its future seemed assured. Having followed it through two restorations, the Resident Historian realises that Raffles will never be out of date.

When the hotel closed its doors in March 1989 for a major makeover, more than three thousand people gathered to say goodbye; a British couple who had been in residence for seven years had to pack their bags. As the $160 million restoration proceeded, over two and a half years, Leslie and his camera roamed over the site, excavating a piece of crockery denoting “Emmerson’s Tiffin Rooms” and shards of china with the Sarkies Brothers’ logo on them. He came upon a pair of horseshoes—and then the skeleton of a full-grown horse—dating from the time when stables had stood behind the Palm Court wing.

After the hotel reopened, in 1991, the inexpensive rooms I had enjoyed cost ten times more than before, and Raffles was again a sparkling recreation of an antique home for crowned heads, not the dusty remembrance of things past that I had cherished. Already, sleek new towers were coming up in every corner of the city to house visitors; there were said to be more first-class hotels on Orchard Road alone than in all Australia. But none of them would ever be able to offer memories and experiences dating back to the year of Victoria’s Jubilee. Raffles was the place where, as J. G. Farrell had it, one could taste “the old feeling of space and tranquility which used to make Singapore such a pleasant place to live in”. And in a city that was developing “vertical farms” and high-rise factories, Raffles was a blessedly al fresco and human-scaled place where, in Farrell’s words, locals gathered to gaze at the lucky few from Europe “dining on the lawn beneath the tall pencil palms”.





BERKSHIRE IN THE TROPICS


“Of course great hotels have always been social ideas, flawless mirrors to the particular societies they service. Had there never been an Empire there would not have been Raffles.”

—Joan Didion, 1970





What is it about writers and hotels, I keep thinking as I watch men in white hard-hats reduce the old Raffles to dust and prepare it for modern furnishings and vibrant colours? I’m something of an oddity, I recognise; growing up between places, I’m most at home in transit zones. At the age of sixty-two I’ve never owned a piece of property; the tiny, two-room apartment my wife and I have shared for twenty-six years in suburban Nara might almost be a suite in a no-star hotel. By the age of six, I was already spending six months with my parents in a hotel in Chicago, mesmerised by the sound of sirens in the street and the taste of Turtles chocolates; by the age of nine, I was going to school by plane. Nowadays, I often set myself up in such oases of convenient anonymity, my one-man writer’s retreats in which I don’t have to give a thought about food or laundry or maintenance and can live in the alternative world of my imagination for weeks on end.

And when I need to seek out a place in which to find the comforts of home served up amidst the facilities of somewhere exotic, where better than Singapore? It came of age under British rule, just as I did; it freed itself from that burden and moved towards an American model in almost the same year I moved to the United States. And now it is something of a pioneer in the world of multiculturalism, a spiritual centre for people like me, who delight in finding all our many bases converging in a relatively harmonious whole. How could I not feel at home in a hotel such as Raffles, where the faces are Chinese and Indian and European and Malay, the language is English and the general managers have come from Italy and Argentina and France and Holland and Germany?

But for any writer anywhere, the pull of a hotel may be something deeper. A hotel is restaurant and spa and garden and shopping arcade and bedroom all together; but, more powerfully, it’s an escape from dailiness into a world in which everything becomes interesting. A visitor brings open eyes—wide-awake senses—to a hotel she’d seldom summon at home. For me, stepping into Raffles is like setting foot within an anthology of stories. Romances and spy thrillers and family reunions are bursting out all around, and I am free to imagine them any way I choose. That honeymoon couple is giggling next door, and a woman in high heels is striding down the corridor to the elevators (in relief or rage, I cannot tell). That couple at the front desk seem to be disagreeing about what their family name might be, and that man in the corner observing everything might be a spy (or even, in truth, another novelist).

Every time I step into Raffles, I think of Joseph Roth, the Mitteleuropean writer who made a habit—actually, a creed—of living out of a suitcase; for a fatherless soul displaced by the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a hotel is a cathedral of acceptances, the rare place where judgements are suspended and everyone can be accommodated. A “fatherland”, in fact, that takes people in and offers them company and warmth.

“The hotel that I love,” Roth declared, “is situated in one of the great port cities…I celebrate my return to lobby and chandelier, porter and chambermaid.” For Roth, a constant exile thrown about by the tsunamis of the twentieth century, a hotel was, as J. G. Farrell wrote of Singapore, a “nation of transients”. On the first page of Roth’s famous novel Hotel Savoy (a collection of his articles is called The Hotel Years), he writes, “The Hotel Savoy, with its seven storeys, its gilded coat of arms and its uniformed porter, seems to me more European than any other hotel in the east.” I can think of one other hotel that fits that description nicely.

“Everything was homely,” the grateful traveller goes on, “as in a room in which one has spent one’s childhood. Everything was consoling and warm, like returning again to someone beloved.” Elsewhere he describes picking up the telephone to say hello to the operator; at the front desk he catches up with the receptionist. A doorman pays his taxi for him, and nobody asks how long he will be staying. The final benefit, for a writer, is that “I have only to open the window, and the world steps in”.

Roth felt as keenly as anyone did how luxury should be emotional as well as sensual; the great amenity a hotel offers is an unquestioning welcome. The other guests are “slightly on holiday from the rigidity of love of land” and joined under a common roof, with a common longing to be free of their everyday surroundings, much as the early citizens of independent Singapore were linked, so it was hoped, by a shared set of goals and sense of future, whatever their differences in background. For Roth, a hotel was not just—as for any writer—an ideal blend of solitude and community; it was a model of the open-door, multinational city of tomorrow.

For many of us, though, there’s something more going on: “hotel rooms inhabit a separate moral universe,” Tom Stoppard famously observed, and the writer’s job is to become something other than himself as he dreams his way into the intimate lives of others. In many a book, a writer is creating a hotel of the imagination, a place of interlocking dramas in which he can orchestrate comings and goings, and throw into the same room a lonely man and a woman with a past. When Marcel Proust took himself off, again and again, to the Grand Hotel at Cabourg (translated to Balbec in his epic novel), he was of course repairing to a room in which he’d have a whole staff to tend to his needs and not just a housekeeper; but he was also seeking out a “veritable Arabian Nights palace”, as he called it, in which a thousand and one stories awaited him in the workers and fellow guests he came to know so well.

For a certain type of person, a hotel is a changing room, a hiding place and a subject; when Leonard Cohen made a film called I Am a Hotel, he was reflecting with characteristic dryness on both his gypsy life and the impermanence of most of our longings, our loves. And when Monica Ali in a recent novel sets her action around the kitchen of a contemporary London hotel, she’s finding in the place a metaphor—an engine—for a fusion society in which people from everywhere gather from everywhere to cook up fresh combinations.

Hotels exert such a pull on authors—Vladimir Nabokov spent his last sixteen years in the Palace Hotel in Montreux, its ornate furnishings and impeccable service perhaps taking him back to the privileges of his long-missed Russian boyhood—that other writers come to hotels as they would to a mentor’s blue-plaqued home, in a spirit of homage. We can imagine ourselves, as we check into Raffles, in the rooms, even in the slippers of Malraux and Neruda and Hemingway.

“The sun was high overhead and merciless by the time we arrived at the Raffles Hotel,” the brilliant American humourist S. J. Perelman wrote, as he made his way straight to Singapore’s most famous landmark on his arrival in 1948, “and it was good to relax over a gimlet in the cool darkness.” For a lifelong literary pilgrim such as Perelman, coming to Raffles meant, in effect, stepping into a short story by its most famous resident Somerset Maugham. He’d hardly arrived before Perelman was scouring the lawns for “aquiline-featured cads involved in desperate intrigues with the wives of neighboring planters”.

The haunted chronicler of post-war England—drawn to everything that is the opposite of England, while writing under the alias of John le Carré—sets scenes in virtually every novel in modest B&Bs, or forgotten hotels on the wrong side of town; it’s not hard to imagine that that’s where he goes undercover to write his books, in a place where nobody can place him. In The Night Manager, le Carré makes his protagonist a solitary drifter who takes on temporary assignments in hotels, as if to keep his identity fluid and secret. But every le Carré novel takes place in the spiritual equivalent of a hotel room, with a main character who wonders where his (and everybody else’s) loyalties really belong.

“When I bumped into Peter Simms at the Raffles Hotel in Singapore—where else?” le Carré writes in his memoir, The Pigeon Tunnel, he sensed immediately that he had come upon a figure to place at the heart of an Anglo-Asian novel. Simms was a onetime secret agent who had worked for both Time magazine and the Sultan of Oman; he’d fallen in love with a beautiful princess from the Shan States while studying Sanskrit at Cambridge and he’d taught in Rangoon. Le Carré spells out that the meeting took place in Raffles because, perhaps, Simms seemed “so full of energy and dreams, so ardently British, yet so identified with Asian culture”. Raffles is the rare place where both Brits and those in flight from Britain can find much to divert them. In the end, there’s nowhere you’re more likely to encounter such “characters” than in a hotel rich with character.







I never forget how my heart had begun thumping as the taxi drove me through emerald canopies of trees to Beach Road in 1984. This was nothing like the Southeast Asia I’d seen in Mandalay or Chiang Mai; but nor was it as familiar and predictable as the green places I’d seen in Rio or San Diego could be. I stepped into the gardens at Raffles and saw hummingbirds and golden orioles, heard bulbuls sometimes among the breadfruit trees.

But there in the midst of mango trees and banana palms was good old England: in the stately white corridors, the well-cut lawns, the brass switches near the door. Yes, it was like being at school again—but in a school magically transported to the tropics, and made fresh and exotic and unfathomable; when we’d laboured over Greek irregular verbs in our medieval classrooms, there’d been no chirruping insects, no soft female voices in the dark.

I’d never been anywhere that mixed cucumber sandwiches, their crusts exactingly cut off, with cocktails invented on the premises that blended cherry brandy and grenadine and pineapple juice; I’d never stayed in a place where strong tea was served with fresh papaya. For a kid who’d just completed a long article on the Near East for a mainstream magazine and one on the very British Old Boy Cyril Connolly for a maverick paper, it felt as if office and holiday had suddenly become one.

As a teenager in my boarding-school cell, I’d devoured Hermann Hesse’s Journey to the East, and determined that I, too, would travel in search of a deeper destiny on the far side of the world; now I learned that Hesse was just one of the Nobel laureates who’d made a home for a while in Raffles. Soon after I moved to Japan, three years later, the bad-boy local novelist Ryu Murakami was bringing out a novel, Raffuruzu Hoteru, which would be quickly made into a film, and before I knew it, thousands of my new neighbours were flocking to see how a sometime Japanese army base had been turned into a romantic evocation of the Raj.

Asia was giving me much to write about; but here was a place, open and alien, that made me think I could sit down and survive as a scribbler. I could set myself up as a lifelong traveller and, much like the Maugham and Graham Greene and le Carré I’d grown up on, fashion new dramas that drew on the world that was forming and reforming all around me. Where better for an English-born runaway than a piece of Berkshire alive with tropical scents and flowers?





THE GENTLEMAN IN THE CORNER


“Not more than three decades ago the greasy water around [Clifford Pier, the landing point for early immigrants and visitors to Singapore,] was populated by huddled flotillas of bumboats and Chinese barges that ferried goods and passengers to and from the ships out on the sea roads; the moss- and barnacle-encrusted steps of the landing stage were laved by teal and tea-coloured tides that brought in wrack, driftwood, the occasional coconut, and bracing smells of the sea, giving one the sense of expansive breadth, of horizons unlocked to the immense reaches of the Malay Archipelago and rumours of the world beyond.”

—Boey Kim Cheng, remembering his youth





As I began returning to Singapore after Raffles’ first restoration, I saw a city that was ever more quickly surging into the future tense and towards the centre of the world. Raffles in its second incarnation had become an exquisitely recreated emblem of the early days of the twentieth century, when the hotel was young. Yet the city all around it looked to be a trailer for the coming century. No metropolis I knew had created such an efficient, streamlined, climate-controlled model of the city of the future, by no means British or Chinese but at heart a thoroughfare for people streaming in from every direction to make something larger than the sum of their parts. The tallest hotel in the world—impenitently called the Stamford—had come up across the street from Raffles (though now the two are sisters, governed by the same company), and one was unlikely to think of seediness or the shadows when she touched down in sweet-smelling Changi, the crossroads of the modern world.

A couple of times I came to Singapore to get over jet lag while travelling between the Far West and the Far East. I looked in on Raffles every time, but usually I stayed in the look-alike blocks that encircled Orchard Road. My body sixteen hours out of sync, I awoke every day at 9pm (5am in California), and took breakfast in one of the gleaming, late-night convenience centres amidst the gilded shopping malls. Then I walked through much of the night, in and out of alleyways and deserted streets, trying to pick up the city’s subconscious and everything that didn’t show up during the daylight hours. I saw women seated on rattan chairs outside pungent doorways, tubes of pink lighting flickering above them. I saw joss sticks burning beside guttering candles in backstreet Chinese shops. I watched girls strutting past the Royal Thai Embassy alone in the dark and African men shuffling down red-lanterned streets in search of cavernous international phone-calling centres. When I’d spent four months travelling across Asia in 1985, the only place in the continent I could find from which to call home was one of these huge hallways off Killiney Road.

By 6am (2pm in Santa Barbara), I’d return to my hotel for lunch and then sleepily drift around the zoo and the Botanic Gardens before a light dinner and a night’s sleep in early afternoon.

For some Singaporeans—and romantics from abroad—it could be bittersweet to note that the last vestiges of something peeling and patched together were fading fast. The debris and the stench that Boey Kim Cheng evokes from the 1970s were barely graspable by the mid-1990s. As I walk along the impeccably protected Singapore River with Jean Wee from the National Heritage Board in 2018, and she shows me how City Hall and the Supreme Court have been beautifully repurposed, she stops along what used to be a filthy body of water and confesses, “The smell! That’s part of the intangible heritage. And that’s gone for good!”

On the other hand, writers such as Boey are wonderfully more in evidence these days; every time I returned to Singapore as the new millennium approached, friends introduced me to new chroniclers of the old, new museums, new publishing houses and bookshops. There was a sense that, having firmly established its official text, the tireless and determined city-state was now developing its margins. In time I’d notice how the British army barracks at Rochester Park were home these days to a high-tech district, and the Convent of the Holy Infant Jesus, its white walls gleaming just across from Raffles, was a gorgeous labyrinth of poly-national restaurants. The “Gate of Hope”, where orphan girls had been abandoned to the sisters’ care, was today just a monument to a sadder and more ungovernable time.

Raffles itself had been restored to become one of the signature properties of Asia, a place for very special occasions. It had its first Singaporean general manager, Jennie Chua, and its name was such a talisman that now an entire hotel group was named in its honour. For New Year’s Eve in 1998, I took my sixty-seven-year-old mother to the Angkor temples she’d been dreaming of since she was a little girl, and neither of us could quite believe the sumptuousness of the new hotel that Raffles Hotels and Resorts had unveiled in what, a few years before, had been a wilderness scarred by genocide. Five months later I invited my best friend from high school in Berkshire to join me in Phnom Penh, and we spent a week amidst the jasmine-scented telephones of another Raffles property, Le Royal, watching Singaporeans sip pumpkin soup with gold leaf in it and basking in the friendly solicitude of a Cambodian staff overjoyed to have a new chance at life.

Whenever I stepped in for tea at my old haunt on Beach Road, or raided the gift shop for mouse pads or cufflinks to take back to Japan, I found Raffles to be a mix of Japanese visitors, British customs and Singaporeans of Chinese and Indian and Malay ancestry who now were much more attuned to a global wavelength; Bugis Street was known for shopping, and the Old Parliament House was host to “New Age curries”. The city still evoked many of my homes for me, but I realised that California could never be so tropical and the skies above the cricket pitches in Oxford would seldom be so bright. India would rarely enjoy this degree of discipline, and Japan, now falling behind in the global economy, could only envy such ease with international markets. Even Hong Kong, as the British prepared to leave, seemed clamorous and uncertain next to the smooth, high-rising city that I could barely recognise each time I visited.

The writer in me, however, is inevitably drawn to everything untracked and untamed, and that was most visible here late at night: the men in their undershirts barking numbers in their overcluttered storefronts in Chinatown, the massed Technicolour tiles of Little India. The sense of whispered deals at the far end of Orchard Road. Everything I could never have found in England or Japan, and everything that made me feel, exhilaratingly, at sea, as those newly arrived from the Home Counties must have partially felt in Singapore, where the buildings looked familiar even as their gardens crawled with geckos and snakes.

In the grip of this feeling, I went back to Japan and began putting together an anthology of essays by the writer who had possessed me since boyhood, and the writer who was also, not entirely by chance, the author most closely associated with Raffles. I had never done this for any other novelist—I’d never do it again—but as I read and reread Maugham’s old bulletins from Southeast Asia, and then carried sheaves of pages to my local grocery store to photocopy, I was reminded how much, deep down, he would always belong in the hotel that reflected him back to himself, as a deeply English presence formed by everything that was the opposite of the grey, rainy, conventional world he delighted in fleeing. From the beginning, nearly all Maugham’s great works—Of Human Bondage, The Moon and Sixpence, The Razor’s Edge—are about men who long to throw off the comforts and confinements of a familiar world at home and give themselves over to wild romances, mystical quests, the ragged outlines of an artist’s life in Toledo or Tahiti or the Himalayas.

Maugham will always be the patron saint of writer-travellers because he saw with such open sympathy why so many of us long to overturn our lives and steal into other selves, destinies that take even us by surprise. That’s another reason he’s the ultimate resident of a hotel, where so many are slipping into new identities and doing the things we could never dream of doing in Kent or Surrey. A city like Singapore was for him a theatre where wanderers could escape from domestic routine and enter something hot, heady and transforming.

In my mind’s eye, I always see Maugham as the gentle-man in the corner—his room in the Palm Court is at one end of the corridor—concealing himself behind his shy, English manner and his stammer. To the casual observer he looks to be a classically buttoned-up, Waspish product of the British ruling classes. But underneath that double-breasted carapace, he was hungry for something uncensored, even naked, sending his secretary out to gather stories for him at the bar and then using those prompts to fling himself into the passions that he did not so often give public voice to in his life.

The Resident Historian of Raffles remembers two colleagues who shared with him stories of working with Maugham in the hotel. One, Mr Ahmad, came away with a signed photograph, and the other, Ho Wee How, recalled how Maugham would carry his table out into the garden to write and then urge his friend on the staff to learn how to read so he could enjoy a Somerset Maugham short story or two.

By the time Maugham arrived in Raffles for the first time, in 1921, he’d already been to China and the South Seas; having been born and spent his first ten years in France before shipping off to English boarding school, he’d always known how to witness England’s encounters with the world from both sides of the table. It was in Singapore that Maugham smoked his first bowl of opium and it was in Singapore, having recently swanned around Los Angeles with Charlie Chaplin, that he got his first and strongest view of the complex and ambiguous relationship between Empire and its subjects. Kipling had found the “native town” unexpectedly far from the colonial quarter; Maugham saw them as surprisingly close, and their denizens all over one another. By day the imperial Brits might be giving all the orders; by night, the locals called upon their own very different powers to get some of their own back.

“Singapore is the meeting place of a hundred peoples,” Maugham wrote in one of his most famous stories, “The Letter”. Always on alert for restlessness and longing, he described an Englishman for whom “England’s a foreign land”, and a Chinese clerk who had studied law in London and who spoke “beautiful English, accentuating each word with precision”. Singapore was where those who found themselves stuck in villages—or on plantations—came for a taste of the glamorous larger world; amidst the “gay, multitudinous streets of the city”, Maugham registered “Englishmen in their topees and white ducks, speeding past in motorcars or at leisure in their rickshaws” and “ships of all nations lying at anchor”.

He was fortunate, perhaps, to experience the hotel in its heyday, and the city at a midpoint between the reawakening that began in 1819 and the dazzling arrivals we notice in 2019. Maugham’s great gift, contrary to appearances, was never to be blasé or detached. A character in one of his stories goes to a museum, “but it was outside, in the streets, that was most thrilling”. Singapore itself and Raffles were the real museums for Maugham, with constantly changing exhibitions, which move a young man to laugh “aloud with joy”. Ultimately it was the romance of abroad that fascinated Maugham, and liberated him: the long line of rickshas, the sampans, the “Chinese shops on Victoria Road” and everything that was sensuous and starlit and heavy with torch ginger blossoms.

“There’s nothing much to see in Singapore,” a sailor declares in one story. To which another says, with every kind of insinuation, “I’ve found plenty.”





FUSION OF FUSIONS


Singapore “is transforming itself into a new kind of city—the Global City. It is a new form of human organisation and settlement that has, as the historian Arnold Toynbee says, no precedent in mankind’s past history… They have found a name for this distinctive type of city. They call it Ecumenopolis—the world embracing city”.

—S. Rajaratnam, then minister of foreign affairs, 1972





I make my way along Orchard Road one jam-packed Sunday afternoon, one hundred and ninety-nine years after the first Brit began doing business here, and I quickly discern that Maugham would have no trouble concocting a hundred and ninety-nine fresh tales were he to reappear today, replaying the dramas of old in a new-millennium key. Pale, drawn memsahibs in summer frocks are pulling along four-year-old grandchildren, trying not to think too much about where their Henrys or Percivals might have been last night. Everywhere I look, these same men (or their colleagues), wispy-haired and large-bellied, lobster-coloured in the heat, are walking hand-in-hand with lissome, long-haired, dark-skinned girls younger than their daughters. The rubber plantation of Maugham’s day may be a twenty-sixth-floor condo now, but the story’s much the same.

The second-floor lobby of Shaw House is so packed, there’s no room for me to sit. On every square inch, posted against pillars, on thick white cushions, up against the windows, are women from the Philippines, sandals slipped off beside them next to cartons of lunch, white buds in their ears as they tap their feet to a beat, perhaps with a loved one they’re FaceTiming in Manila. On the street, where suitcases are being sold at fifty per cent off, their friends and cousins are heading in excited flocks into the remittance centres around Lucky Plaza, signs all in Tagalog, or posing for friends’ smartphones in front of the huge entranceways above which it says “Gucci” or “Louis Vuitton”.

At the drop-off point outside Takashimaya, a Chinese woman with a Harrods bag is impatiently tapping for her Grab, while another matron pushes along a shopping cart filled with tightly-knotted white bags. Not far from where a dark-haired woman is leading two blond-haired children to their Durian McFlurries, an earnest evangelist pushes into my hand free material about a Buddhist film festival, screening movies called Karma and Becoming Who I Was. How could Maugham resist any of this, especially given his enduring sympathy for the man who’s given up the world he knows to live simply in a foreign place, contemplating its ironies and its sorrows?

On every side, I’m encircled by stories of homesickness and longing: “Hello, Mister Nice Guy,” the woman from Ilocos Norte is whispering into her phone in the food court, on the fourth level of the basement, while several levels up from her, that local girl just out of Stanford is poking through the leather handbags near the Saint Laurent store, and wondering why she feels so removed from her parents at the hawker centre.

Singapore, I think, is no longer the last gasp of Empire I met when young, and more and more the harbinger of something exciting and new; a true multiculture, after all, is less a place where a hundred languages are spoken than one where a single common language is understood by all. Just as I’m thinking this, I find myself on the second floor of the Apple Store, where a young glamour puss, as if on fire, is throwing out aphorisms about how to get ahead and become your own untrumpable brand.

“You need to have faith in who you are and what you are,” she declaims at high speed, flinging around references to the coming Formula One race to deliver what could be the gospel of the city around her. And then, as if to share the gospel of Raffles, “You need to go slow in order to go faster.” Dozens of young followers in Red Bull T-shirts and high-fashion cut-offs sit rapt before the siren’s vision of the future.







Hours later, I climb up to the fifty-seventh floor of a Marina Bay Sands tower just as the sun is setting and see the backstage story of the ever more assertive and urban port, registering some of the ways in which it may not have changed so much at all: I count 113 freighters and tankers out in the water, quite apart from the ones docked amidst an almost unimaginably complex network of chimneys and loading areas and industrial spaces. It’s blocked from most people’s view now, by the 2,561-room hotel with what looks like a giant surfboard at its top, but this is the motherboard that helps keep the shiny new Singapore of 2019 rolling forwards: it’s what’s out of view that powers the boom and thrust of connections with Busan and Panama and Yokohama.

When I make my way to the Long Bar again, to chat with a young Singaporean who works in data analysis—we met for the first time six weeks earlier, in a Catholic hermitage on the remote Central Coast of California—cool jazz is playing as I step into the shaded space. The place is full, but I’m reminded how much Raffles is a web of nooks and crannies. In a city of rectangles and squares, it offers the grace of a circle, which is to say something intimate and enveloping; the Long Bar feels like an assembly of private corners, better suited to confidences than to brassy announcements.

Derrick has been here only once, for a special occasion, but as a former future strategist, he devotes much of his life to thinking about the question both Raffles and the city around it are constantly addressing: how to straddle past and future so as to neglect neither one. He’s bemused by the promiscuous trendiness that consumes some of his peers; they’re charging for water in certain restaurants now, he tells me, with an incredulous smile, and “the beauty of that is that it’s tap water and tap water is one hundred per cent potable in Singapore”. Around us, I notice how some people dress up for Raffles, as if they’re being presented to the Queen; the man steering his uncertain way between the monkey nuts is clad in a black velvet jacket in the humid afternoon. Others are relaxing in T-shirts and shorts.

Derrick’s grown impatient, he goes on as we sip our tropical concoctions, with airy speculations and the dreamy “what ifs” of being a watcher of the skies; he wants to be rooted again in the clarity and concreteness of facts. And nowhere in this city of constant movement feels more rooted than the grand old lady who sometimes reminds me of the elegant woman I just saw walking under a white parasol between the tall towers of glass.

In its latest iteration, the hotel, more than twice as old as the republic around it, is unveiling two new French restaurants, startling in look and feel; but its third fresh establishment is yì, by the master of modern Chinese cuisine Jereme Leung, who’s built fashionable eateries from Manila to Shanghai, and now returns to Singapore to open a place that is defiantly not “East–West” or “fusion”.

History, I recall, is not something dead and past; it’s what’s coming to light right now, a never-ending process that looks as much like the Singapore River as the fixed monuments along its shore. Those who oversee the hotel’s destiny are keenly aware that the original Raffles was the first place in Singapore to host a French chef; thus the new Alain Ducasse restaurant where the Bar & Billiards Room used to sit is not so much a break with tradition as a refreshing of it. And the fact that what was for so long a grill as sturdy and beefy as a British officer is now a small and enticingly feminine restaurant in pastel shades from Anne-Sophie Pic recalls that, since its earliest years, what Raffles offered was what had never been seen in town before (those fans, those electric lights!).

That women should be central to the new Raffles is part of what the millennium requires; we’re ever more alive to the fact that history is not the sole preserve of men called Raffles or Farquhar (or Sang Nila Utama or Lee Kuan Yew). As I wander the city for almost two weeks, it’s women I meet running the British Council, organising marketing for Raffles, managing the historical legacy of the city. The head bartender in the refined and exclusive drinking place up the winding staircase from the Long Bar—there’s the hotel billiards table!—is another woman, and a Singaporean, recently chosen as one of the best at her job in Australia.

And although five of the new suites—that raise the number of rooms in Raffles from 103 to 115—are named after the cinemas where locals used to take in the movies of such Raffles residents as Charlie Chaplin and John Wayne, two of its other new suites are named after women who deserve to be remembered: Lady Sophia, Raffles’ widow, whose loving memoirs did so much to enshrine the myth of her husband as a gentle visionary; and Lady Mountbatten, the last vicereine of India, who met her great friend Jawaharlal Nehru in Singapore, a place he acclaimed as a “great cosmopolitan city” that would become the spot where “Asian unity is forged”.







On a personal level, I’m startled at how many roads in my life keep drawing me back to Singapore; in the post-national age, home is not something you’re born with, often, so much as something you piece together out of many places, or something that finds you as you travel, when you realise that your kin might be a city, your friends the places whose questions reflect back to you your own.

In college, I’d begun to receive letters from my guardian, in his new, palatial residence on Stevens Road; though a deeply diligent and thoughtful British soul who worked for Lloyd’s—and maybe (as Maugham would have seen) because a deeply diligent and thoughtful British soul who worked for Lloyd’s—he could feel himself pulled by everything he couldn’t understand in his new home: the sense of romance, of mysticism, of something just out of reach. “In the soft light of evening,” I recall reading in Maugham, “the busy scene was strangely touched with mystery.”

Now, not far from Raffles, I find that Jim’s elder daughter—the girl I’d grown up with as a kind of quasi-brother—is back here, overseeing a $1 billion project out at sea; I ascend the lift to her fifth-floor flat in a complex called The Caribbean, and we remember how exotic it had seemed when her parents moved out of their big white house near Regent’s Park and came to the sparkling bungalow where they could jump straight from the first-floor study into a pool.

Not far away lives Michael, the star of our German classes at school; in the classic British way, he’d come out East soon after he finished his studies at Oxford and lived on and off in Asia for a quarter of a century. He ran the Old Etonian Association in Singapore, and in our school’s alumni newsletter, I grew used to seeing photos of sixty Old Boys toasting the school in the tropics and singing “Floreat Etona”, even in a place where many didn’t see the British presence as much of a blessing.

Parag, the tireless global chronicler I’d met in Washington is also here; after taking degrees in Georgetown and in London, he seemed to sense that the only place from which to survey the new planet coming to life was Singapore. I recall how his little girl Zara had travelled to twenty-four countries before her third birthday, instinctively taking the whole planet as her home. Then I remember how my mother had told me that the brother of her best friend from the Cathedral and John Connon School in Bombay lives here—and the son of her other best friend from school. When so many pieces of one’s life come together in one place, they form the outlines of what can look very much like a face (or, you could say, a home).







What does luxury really mean, I muse, as I wander between the cathedrals of brand names and jewelled arcades that mark Singapore today as the “great emporium” Raffles foresaw in 1823? We crave most, I think, what we have least, and when I was a boy, this was often grandeur. Luxury then might be a huge limo, a palace, a swimming pool large enough for the Olympics. But now so many of our days and months are so caught up in intrusions—cell-phone call, text message, breaking news—that what we’re really crying out for is time. What sounds more appealing than a day without disruptions?

As I follow the road from Clarke Quay down to the historic district—only twelve policemen in all of Singapore in 1820, a plaque reminds me—I think of how the very words “fret” and “rush” fall away when I step into Raffles. The day opens up, and a different sense of space, in this outstretched network of seven gardens, becomes an expanded sense of time. It’s as if one’s away from the world of race cars and roulette wheels and back in the comfort

of a Maugham short story; one reason Hollywood has turned to his fiction more than one hundred and fifty times—often in the twenty-first century—is that Maugham deals in feelings and humanity, and those tend never to grow old.

As I pass the Padang and the cathedral—there’s the gleaming National Library in which I saw a room full of bright kids assemble for a “quiz night” recently!—I also recall how there are almost twenty international travellers today for every one when I was a boy. The city near which I live, Kyoto, sees fifty-five million visitors a year, and that number is escalating fast; in Venice, tourists outnumber locals by four hundred to one.

Raffles may draw thousands every day, but somehow it never feels crowded—or like anywhere else. So many hotels I visit, unable to make me feel truly at home, simply try to eliminate every trace of the foreign; their look-alike corridors attempt to comfort the weary by presenting the same layout you’ve seen in Frankfurt and Dallas and Abu Dhabi. But I’ve never been able to make emotional contact with a skyscraper, or in one, either; and though I’ve stayed in eleven other hotels in Singapore, I’ve never found myself thinking back on their ceilings and lawns.

At heart, home is the place where you have memories; the place that goes so deep inside you that the story of your life seems to unfold there. And as I think that, I recall the front office manager at Raffles who comes in on his day off to accompany a loyal guest—really, an old friend—on her 6.30am walk. He’s taken her to his mother’s grave, and after going all the way to the airport to see her off, he has tears in his eyes as he speaks of her. That guest, Madame Shoof, from Germany, has stayed in Raffles more than fifty times by now—she visits four times a year, for a month each time—and refers to the place where she has her own chair in the lobby as her “second home”, its staff her “second family”.

A couple from Switzerland has been coming to Raffles to stay for six months of every year; the two of them dine at the same table every evening and toast one another with Champagne every night. Like so many around them, they surely think of Raffles as something more than a hotel; it’s their old friend’s place in the country where they can drop in whenever the time is right, as familiar as home and as comforting.

When I go through forty-six years of photos with the Resident Historian, there’s one thing that strikes me again and again. Somehow, over the space of almost half a century, Leslie Danker looks almost the same in every photo. The slim, bright-eyed young dreamer I see in the images from the 1970s is more than evident in the trim, laughing new friend who’s sitting beside me. He turns eighty in August 2019, he tells me, just after he’s entered his third version of Raffles. But eighty in this space looks very much like thirty.





POST-MODERN CARAVANSERAI


“Singapore takes on an altogether new appearance, more or less unique to itself, and more truly futuristic than anywhere else I know.”

—Jan Morris





As my days in Singapore gain momentum, I start to observe the Mass Rapid Transit trains as if they were the city’s X-rays. Yes, they shine with an ingenuity and cleanliness, an efficiency, that could put even Tokyo to shame; but what I’ve come to cherish in them is the human element. This is where I catch Singapore in its off-hours, unscripted again; this is what the city might be behind the official slogans.

A head-scarved woman, who’s just boarded at Dhoby Ghaut, is seated next to a young man with a Hindu caste mark; across from them is a Filipina on her way to church, I guess from her formal dress, next to a matron who may well be off to perform her weekly worship at Prada. Their religions, their races, their classes are different, but there isn’t the crackle of tension I feel in New York, the grumpy jostle of the Underground in London; occasionally, there may even be a sense that it’s in everyone’s interest to let everyone else go in peace.

Everyone who visits Singapore knows the shadow side of this, and points to the cartoon characters on the MRT walls, Stand-Up Stacey and Give-Way Glenda, who instruct passengers as if we were kindergarteners; no one is likely to take Singapore’s approach to diversity as perfect. But it’s been dealing with the issue of how to bring cultures together since its birth, seven centuries ago; and the centuries of experience it gained as a port took on fresh usefulness when it became that rare modern creature, a city-state.

Across the world in recent years we’ve grown nervously aware of the treacherous gap that separates city from countryside; London seems to occupy a different world from much of the rustic land around it, and many in New York may be more in tune with Hong Kong and Paris than with Mississippi. Our world has never seemed so fractured as now, when every government agonises over how to make a mosaic out of a hundred elements; the poignancy of the modern moment, as the refugee crisis reminds us, is that we’re all on the same page but so many are in the margins.

Singapore is obliged to deal with such problems every day, my local friends assure me. But I don’t hear the agitated discussions of race I might hear in St Louis; I’m not sure people are fulminating against immigrants as they do in Canberra. All these issues are alive, as the government famously tries to oversee and legislate every last detail, but I find a sense of texture and history here that I don’t so often associate with Houston or Dubai.

When the most perceptive—which is to say prophetic—of modern travellers, Jan Morris, came to Singapore in 1974, she quickly fathomed that it was “one of the most interesting” places on earth, as she wrote in the first sentence of the preamble to a reprint of her chapter on the city. In part, as a historian, her interest lay in the fact that it stood for “all that was fustiest and snobbiest in the colonial Empire”, everything that was ridiculous in “ineffably conceited barristers” and heartless in its forced exclusions. For Jan, as for many another clear-sighted Brit, Singapore has resonance because it was the place where Empire essentially keeled over. As soon as twenty-three thousand Japanese troops overran the hundred thousand British solders stationed here, in barely two months in 1942, it was clear that the magic trick of Empire had passed its expiration date. Mountbatten could accept the surrender of the Japanese in City Hall three years later, but British power would never come to life again.

“Away to the east,” Jan wrote, as Empire’s most eloquent elegist, “stood the glorious palms of Raffles Hotel, that grand caravanserai of Empire”; later she mentions taking “papaya, toast and marmalade” there every morning, before “loitering around the waterfront”. Yet, always an undeluded realist, Jan could see that Raffles was less interesting as an artefact of the past than as a central element in something new that was coming to light. In Singapore, Jan saw, she was “visiting the future”; the ingenious pragmatist whom his English friends knew as Harry Lee was carefully designing a tapestry in which Britain would be just one small part of an ambitious design.

It only adds to the aptness of Jan’s observations that, two years before she published her essay on Singapore, she went through her own quite radical transformation, when the indomitable explorer and chronicler of the ascent of Everest, James Morris, emerged from North Africa as the matchlesssly fluent portrait-maker of place, Jan Morris.

A moment comes back to me from 1985: in my wonderfully broken old seaman’s hotel off Killiney Road, where I could imagine myself occupying a Conrad novel, the young woman in the room next to mine turned out to be a local. Why was she staying in a hotel in her own hometown, I couldn’t help but wonder?

One lazy afternoon I got my answer. She brought out from her room an album of photographs and began leafing through pictures of a boy. A former beau, I wondered? Or even her brother? And then, too late, I registered: in the city that was remaking itself daily, this she had been, not long ago, a he.







My story is starting to acquire more humanity now, so I begin to turn to the people around me to tell me how they see the future of their ever-changing home. One hot afternoon I find myself being guided around the Botanic Gardens in a golf cart by its director, Dr Nigel Taylor. Though Nigel worked for thirty-four years at Kew Gardens just outside London—sixteen of them as curator—he could hardly contain his delight now at the lavish grounds that have been his preserve for the past seven years. Here’s a 158-year-old tiger orchid, he points out, only two years younger than the Gardens themselves, and over there are some of the sixty “heritage trees” that might have been the floral cousins of Raffles. Right here is the building to which Kew sent twenty-two rubber seedlings in 1877, transforming the world as Malaya (which is to say, very often, Singapore) became the world’s leading rubber supplier within half a century.

In this fresh city, I realise, Nigel can be part of something new and growing; this space is famous, after all, as a classical English landscape garden remade in a tropical setting. And just one morning after my tour of the ten thousand species in Singapore’s first World Heritage Site (so designated in 2015, the Republic’s jubilee year), I end up in the aptly named National Kitchen, in the strikingly refurbished Supreme Court building, perhaps the most sought-after dining seat in the city. As two friends and I linger over pineapple patcheree and Peranakan chicken, the famous and spirited part-owner of the restaurant Violet Oon comes out to join us. Her father, she recalls, was a contemporary of Lee Kuan Yew; in those days, “we were the jewel of the Far East. Singapore and Rangoon and Hong Kong”.

Just one day earlier, Violet was featured all over the front page of the Life section of The Straits Times, noting how “our cuisine is Asia on a plate”. Of course Singapore is the spiritual centre of world cuisine, I think; fusions have been its lifeblood all its life. Even at the modest, self-service cafeteria in the Botanic Gardens, where I’d ordered my lunch through a vending machine, I’d been invited to choose between Nyonya curries, teriyaki donburi, enchilada wraps, pizza, fish and chips and four variations on “English Breakfast”. Violet Oon restaurants are famous for their blend of shepherd’s pie and oxtail stew, chilli crab and Hainanese pork chops.

Everyone registers that Singapore blends Chinese dynamism with Malay charm, and sprinkles over it all some Indian vivacity; but to be a true multiculture, a city or country must have a vision, a larger sense of how to bring competing elements into a stained-glass whole. For so long I’ve been wandering between many-coloured cities to find out which one strides towards the fresh opportunities offered by globalism, and which ones fall back into it, as if diversity were a necessity more than a choice.

At one point, shuttling between Toronto and Atlanta, I noticed how Canada, since the 1960s, had registered that a world of movement and crossing cultures offered the chance to make something exciting and new; the country practised bilingualism, it welcomed twenty-five thousand Syrian refugees within four months of its new prime minister’s arrival and it had created a culture that was conspicuously richer for coming from everywhere. Atlanta, by contrast, had a very global population, but still seemed locked in the black-and-white tensions, the North-South issues of Victoria’s time. Though home to many multinationals—from UPS to Coca-Cola and Delta Air Lines to Home Depot—it reminded me in every breath that all the multinationals in the world don’t add up to real internationalism.

For its part, Singapore famously buzzes with unexpected combinations: the spiced streets are humming when I visit Little India after midnight one evening, with a neon sign outside a money changer’s outfit running a never-ending string of greetings—“Happy Christmas and New Year”—even though Christmas is a hundred days away. South Indian music is booming over the excited chatter of diners filling long tables on the pavement, and in Mustafa Centre, the legendary, open-all-night eight-storey department store down the road, people from everywhere are browsing among the trays given over to knock-off Casios and whole bookshelves devoted to the “Noble Quran”.

In Chinatown, every newcomer is struck at how a busy mosque stands less than a block from a Hindu temple, on what is (mistakenly) called Pagoda Street. And the next street down, long famous for its palaces of pleasure, is called Temple Street. Yet what’s much more evident in Chinatown today is a pulsing network of design studios and modelling agencies and racy bars that belong to no one culture or even mix of cultures; the language of Singapore right now is that of the makeover, as the city becomes famous as much for its sense of style as for its substance, and sometimes the word “multiculturalism” itself seems out of date.

Even twelve years ago, when I came and stayed in a wildly over-the-top artist-decorated boutique hotel in Chinatown, I was noticing bare-shouldered girls in nose rings, with purple hair, among wasp-waisted boys turning shophouses into hair salons; already Night Buses were carrying clubbers away from a concert by a group called The Dancing Nannies, while a sign offered, “Free Hindi Band Till 6:00 a.m.”

As I wander around the National Gallery now, I come upon one piece in a small exhibition of contemporary art by a Michael Lee, another by a Zai Tang. But the Michael is identified as coming from Singapore and the Zai from Britain. It’s hard not to conclude that, having followed Britain into the twentieth century, Singapore is leading its former ruler through the twenty-first.

As a writer for Time magazine in the 1980s, I had been fascinated by the way Deng Xiaoping came to Singapore to see how political control and economic freedom could be blended, in a society that might be capitalist in its energies though centrally planned in its structures. Market-Leninism, as the Chinese version would be called. One week around the same time, however, I received a confidential memo from a colleague in which a leading member of the Reagan administration confessed that what Washington really needed was someone with the hard spine and intelligence of that fellow in Singapore who’d built up an international power out of nothing.

Before long, even the radical mayor of London, “Red Ken” Livingstone, could be heard saying that his dream was to make his city the “Singapore of the West”. This in a world where Singapore had long been flattered to think that it might become the Manchester of the East.

Three days before my arrival in Singapore in 2018, I’d been staying on West 45th Street in New York; the restaurant down the block was called Bugis Street, I noticed, as if Manhattan itself wished to borrow some of the flavours of Singapore. Three blocks to the south a huge cineplex was screening the hot film of the moment, Crazy Rich Asians, many times a day; as I sat in the crowded auditorium, the jaded New Yorkers around me couldn’t stop gasping over the displays of beauty and affluence onscreen. The first scene of the movie, as of the book it follows, features a Singaporean family buying up an old and snooty London hotel that has been trying to show it the door, as if to remind us that hotels are among the display cases that allow a onetime colonial subject finally to trump its former colonial ruler.

Maugham had seen this coming, as he describes how the minglings of East and West after dark lead to a world in which colours run together. As I watch expat kids along Orchard Road, I don’t think of them as part-Asian and part-Western, even if their mother happens to be small and dark and their father large and white; they’re really the natural citizens of the new millennium. We’re leaving the simple distinctions of old far behind us. In my parents’ day, Singapore was known for its divisions—European women were not allowed in many men’s preserves, Europeans kept their distance from Eurasians, middle-class Brits were eager to have little to do with their working-class compatriots. Now, Brits and Japanese are side by side in the Long Bar. As the insurance ad I saw in the MRT had it, “The future is closer than you think.”







Meanwhile, home keeps pursuing me wherever I happen to go, and I start to think of Singapore as the place where I—where we—can think through not just our past but our destiny. One humid morning I sit along Clarke Quay and recall how all roads seem to lead to this modern Rome. Eight years ago, the ad agency DDB invited me to give a talk in its Singapore office, and when I looked blank at the mention of a website, its deeply humane CEO was so taken aback that he offered to devote all his highly professional resources, for free, to building me a digital home, much as he and his team had done for Changi and Singapore Airlines and some of the world’s great multinationals.

Not much later, I now remember, at the Singapore Writers Festival, every writer in attendance was greeted by crowds, for every event, larger and more enthusiastic than we had seen anywhere but India; earnest students queued for two hours to have books signed, and I sensed an explosion of pent-up cultural hunger that I couldn’t have imagined in 1984.

After Yale University opened an overseas campus, for the first time in its 318-year history, in alliance with the National University of Singapore in 2013, I found myself, unexpectedly, invited over to give one of its first presidential lectures; in anticipation of my visit, students were invited to offer a piece of writing. The dubious prize for the winners was a lunch with the visiting writer.

The morning after my lecture, I was introduced to the three winners—a very polished son and grandson of diplomats from New Zealand; an enterprising young Singaporean of Chinese ancestry, Mariel, who longed for a taste of abroad even though her parents preferred that she stay at home; and a young man from India, Manas, who was happy to leave home but ever more conscious of the limitations of the West.

We would all get to enjoy a lunch at Raffles, I was informed. As we sat in the November sun, sharing our dreams of fashioning new worlds, Michael, from New Zealand, confessed he’d come to the Writers Bar here to pen his winning entry, imagining Maugham sitting beside him and perhaps describing Michael and his latte for his next story. Just then, a woman from the next table came over and asked if I might by any chance be “Pico”.

Startled, I confessed I was, and she told me that she’d had to read an old work of mine for her book group. Might we get a picture together? Only minutes earlier, I’d been greeted by a businessman whom I’d met at the Jaipur Literature Festival three years earlier, where he was passing his love of books on to his teenage daughters.

“Does this happen to you often?” one of the students, wide-eyed, asked.

“Never!” I said. “This could only happen in Raffles, which is as much a home for readers as for writers.” I certainly couldn’t think of many hotels that place books in every room, as Raffles does, have their own libraries and even set aside spaces along verandahs for guests to settle in with a copy of Murder on the Orient Express or The English Patient. As the four of us strolled into the Writers Bar, we marvelled that such a grand institution would commemorate and keep a place for unassimilable dreamers such as us.

Then, standing up to walk along the river, I remember how, months after my first visit, my new friends at DDB had written to tell me that they were moving to new offices, on Kallang Road. The name of the building to which they were transferring was, improbably, the Pico Creative Centre.

I knew that I had to come over yet again, to be part of their official launch. Not just because of the aptness of the name, but even more because of that “re” at its terminus; it’s details like that that truly pierce us with the look, the feel of home.





CITY OF TOMORROW


Singapore has “grown and advanced beyond measure, and even beyond my warmest anticipations—in importance, wealth and interest, in everything that can give it value and permanence”.

—Sir Thomas Stamford Bingley Raffles,

returning after a three-year absence, in 1822





For Henry Roth, connoisseur of temporary lodgings, a hotel wasn’t enticing just because it offered the writer stories; it served up the added excitement of entering a place where the workers around you are collectors of tales. Every night, he realised, a front office manager takes home more secret dramas than any writer could concoct; every good concierge is a scholar of esoteric needs, much as every general manager has to be a world-class diplomat. I sometimes wonder if anyone knows more about private longings than a chambermaid, obliged to clean up after every rowdy night and keep every piece of dirty laundry to herself.

Did Maugham cross-question his friends on the staff about what they had witnessed and which among the guests had the most unsuspected stories? It’s hard to imagine he’d have wasted such an opportunity. As the new Raffles rises up in the centre of Singapore, I start going down to the area every morning to talk with the people who are orchestrating the transformation; every time I do, I’m reminded how many in their world have to be telepaths, anticipating—and then meeting—a guest’s needs even before the guest becomes aware of them. This regular visitor, I’m told, always wants all carpets removed before she checks in; that one takes his coffee with two sugars every morning at 7.30 on the dot. As the Resident Historian steers me through his thick album of photographs, collected over almost half a century, suddenly we come upon a picture of John McCain, the American senator who died of brain cancer just three weeks earlier.

“A very nice man,” recalls Leslie. “He stayed here many times. He always liked to take his breakfast very early—6.45—in the private dining room.”

When the masters of Raffles flesh out their blueprint for their city of tomorrow, they have to keep in mind both grandfathers and those babies who’ll be born next week. “There’s no reason not to keep what has always been great,” a young and dynamic man in food and beverages assures me, in a bare office overlooking the property coming to new life. “But we don’t want to recreate a museum.” The word he keeps using is “elevate”; like any expert doorman, a hotel has to be exactingly aware of all the people who are leaving the hotel, with memories stretching back decades, as well as of the ones who are streaming in, high with fresh expectations. A good hotel has to live outside every tense.

The gravel driveway of Raffles, I hear, will still in the new property recall the days when it was mostly horse-drawn carriages and rickshas pulling up to the entrance; the wooden floors will still offer the feel of yesterday, though with carpets slightly less Oriental than before. There’ll still be the lighting switches on the walls everyone remembers, and new palms have been planted where old ones had to come down. Yet guests will not now be kept up late at night by the click-clack of high-heel shoes on the floors above them. As he leads me around the dusty outlines of the new property, the front office manager, Bernd Knaier, explains how “many people say, ‘I love your squeaky wooden floors. I love your box TVs. I love your fans.’ But they’re less happy with air-conditioning that isn’t completely reliable. Or windows that let in sounds from the street”.

People love the look of the old, in other words, but they want it to be powered by the new. There will always be people who miss the quirks and cobwebs of a place in its earlier incarnations; but even when the previous restoration tried to accentuate and polish up the old, there were, inevitably, grumbles from the opposite direction. “There’s a difference between being vintage and old-fashioned,” Violet Oon had pointed out to me, “and my daughter, who had a fashion line in LA for many years, told me that we want to be vintage but not old-fashioned.”

The plasma TVs in every refurbished room allow customers to live in the twenty-first century if they choose. But the spaces all around ensure they have access to the twentieth, and even nineteenth, as well.







One morning I have breakfast across the street from Raffles with its fresh general manager, Christian Westbeld, a relatively young boss for such an old property. “There will always be a Raffles Hotel Singapore,” he tells me. “It is something steady in a volatile environment. The hotel has witnessed so many life-changing milestones over the last hundred years, including world wars, financial crises, epidemics, and it has always prevailed.” Nowadays—a biracial divorced actress sits in the House of Windsor from which Victoria ruled over the first Raffles—the hotel has to accommodate that couple from Dorset whose parents grew up in Simla, this rock ’n’ roll icon who’s trying to scope out next year’s trend, that staycationing Singaporean banker who wants a home that isn’t his usual place.

The property has to meet the needs of cruise-ship passengers on their one day in Singapore, hungry to taste a piece of the city’s most famous establishment; it has to serve a matron from Hiroshima and those cool local kids just back from a stint at NYU or Imperial College, London, who demand that their hometown offer everything they can find abroad, and more. It even has to put up with us writers-in-residence eager to sniff out secrets, and the backpackers who follow Lonely Planet’s reminder that “just about everyone who comes to this city makes the pilgrimage here” (the budget guidebook has in some editions printed a whole box on the history of the Singapore Sling).

What the general manager is saying, I suspect, is that the hotel outweighs and stands far beyond any single being; over one hundred and thirty-two years, it has gained real wisdom about change and working with the future. Experience has given it a certain weight, a gravitas, but it’s also given it the playfulness most evident in the old, those elders who have weathered every kind of struggle; it’s evident in the peanut shells on the floor, the tea towels representing the turbaned Sikh doorman, the way the antique showrooms in the shopping arcade have been replaced by something more forward-looking and the four-hundred seat Jubilee Hall is now a chandelier-rich ballroom for the three hundred and fifty weddings that sweep through the premises every year. I remember how the British High Commissioner—as we sat in his high-ceilinged, spacious official residence, Eden Hall, designed by Regent Alfred John Bidwell, the same man who designed Raffles—told me how he’d seen one celebrated “starchitect”, responsible for designing tomorrow, eagerly snapping photos as he came down the carpeted staircase to the Raffles lobby.

“We are really the gatekeepers of the brand DNA,” Christian says, of himself and his staff, “and it is our responsibility now to create the future history and stories of the next generation.” It’s much the same message I got from his colleague in food and beverages, another Old World young man from Germany working on this drafting-board for a new kind of city. “We’re not trying to turn everything upside-down,” he’d told me. “Key elements we retain and elevate. We plan to combine heritage elements with new presentations, while keeping it real food—tasty, flavourful, intimate.” New wine in old bottles, you could say.

The word that the general manager keeps coming back to, I notice, is “emotional”. Maybe because emotions, as Maugham knew, are some of the things that never go out of style.







For forty-five years now, I think, as I walk away from my breakfast with the general manager, I’ve been roaming the globe seeing how we can expand our sense of belonging and how home can be a sentence that keeps unfolding, rather than a given handed to one at birth. I’ve been walking the streets of Melbourne and Vancouver and Macao and Buenos Aires, recording how each of them faces the challenge of trying to create a higher common factor collection of other places, rather than a lowest common denominator. I’ve been travelling and talking with the 14th Dalai Lama, one of the world’s most prominent (and practical) exiles, to see how losing one kind of home can offer an opportunity to create a fresher and more inclusive one; I even once spent two weeks living in and around Los Angeles International Airport, trying to take the measure of the global city of tomorrow.

Nobody can easily forget that Singapore has strictures, and all the challenges that come from having to pull itself up by sheer will over just five decades; even the most high-scoring student continues to mature only by being prepared to listen to what others have to say. At the same time, as I crisscross the city while the new Raffles comes to life, I see that the city’s standard of living and rate of home ownership, long so impressive, are now being matched by a growing independent-mindedness and readiness to ask hard questions of itself.

Singapore is more sure of itself today than I’ve ever seen it to be before; it’s a fresh city, on the move, impatient with yesterday’s answers and not ready to accept obstacles. There are few places I’ve seen that have raised their hipness quotient so dramatically in so short a time. As I walk around the heritage buildings with Jean Wee, responsible for preserving the best of Singapore’s past, she points out, “We try to find new uses for old buildings.” But when we pass a glassy new cube in what is otherwise a beautifully restored old colonial classic, she surprises me by saying, “We should not try to mimic the old. A new building should be new.”

The people who are waiting to flood into the new Raffles, eyeing the polished banisters and the lights along North Bridge Road as the construction nears its end, are seasoned and cosmopolitan, and are not going to settle for anything they’ve seen before. “There’s nothing you don’t find in Singapore,” someone at Raffles had pointed out to me. “The community has grown ever more discerning, and demanding. There’s hardly any city that’s so diverse in its offerings: you go to a food court and you have ten nationalities represented.” What the new Raffles has to offer, he’d concluded, is “an element of recognition and an element of surprise”.

Not a bad formula, I think, for a relationship—or, in fact, a city.







My last night in the city on this long trip, I meet up with my versatile friend Aaron, who has worked in many sectors of the Singaporean government—from the embassy in Washington to the Centre for Strategic Futures, from the Civil Service College (of which he is a director) to the Ministry of Trade and Industry—though now, while continuing his work at home, he’s also enjoying his second stint at Oxford, completing a doctorate on digital governance. I recall how Aaron went through both Raffles Institution and Raffles Junior College before enjoying his first stint in my hometown and collecting a Double First in Philosophy, Politics and Economics.

I ask him how he thinks his city has managed to navigate the future and he reminds me, “After independence, we embraced our diversity and went multiracial. We didn’t, as some countries did, try to build a nation based on a single or primordial identity.” Lee Kuan Yew had been a bold and determined conductor of the orchestra, but others had also worked hard to try to write a score based on harmony. “Our early foreign minister Rajaratnam,” Aaron recalls, “said that being Singaporean was, as he put it, ‘a matter not of ancestry, but of choice and conviction’.”

I’ve never forgotten that Rajaratnam, who would later become deputy prime minister, outlined a vision of Singapore as “global city” at the Singapore Press Club way back in 1972, realising, with astonishing prescience, that a city without a hinterland or a large domestic market could actually become a light-on-its-feet centre for a new virtual and multinational world, a first draft of “the Heavenly City that prophets and seers have dreamt about”.

“We created a civic nationalism, rather than an ethnic nationalism,” Aaron explains; so long as the government could keep turning the city into a shiningly prosperous and high-rising glass capital of possibilities, people were generally willing to pledge their loyalty to the multicultural whole. I recall how Dr Nigel Taylor, at the Botanic Gardens, had told me that Lee Kuan Yew, in the early years of the People’s Action Party, had staged concerts, magic shows and other cultural events in the Gardens. It was Singapore’s nature—its plants and common wealth of beauty—that could unite people, he’d registered, so that the race riots of early decades might be replaced by the collective achievements of coming ones.

Even within the Indian community, Aaron points out, there are not just Tamils here, who have been Singaporeans for generations, but Gujuratis and Parsees and Syrian Christians; there are recent arrivals from every corner of South Asia. Binary distinctions make no sense in a city with ten official religions. I recall just then that Aaron, whom I’d first taken to be of Indian origin, also has Malay and Chinese blood. He’d gone to the An-Nahdhah mosque one day, he tells me—it is blessed with a Harmony Centre—and become an oblate of a Benedictine order (while still remaining a faithful Muslim).

He’s suggested we meet tonight in The Book Café, a place lined with books where Aaron, also a poet, had given his first book reading, thirteen years before. I notice multiple editions of Lolita along the wall, and copies of Monocle magazine, the bible of global cool, in the racks. Every table is full this Saturday evening, and I think back to the BooksActually shop friends had eagerly introduced me to on an earlier trip, and the twenty-minute queues I’d encountered at the enormous Kinokuniya treasure-chest on Orchard Road.

If culture was once seen as a luxury a fast-growing city could hardly afford, now it might seem a luxury that a prominent global marketplace could hardly afford to ignore.

We walk down the street to a sophisticated, but intimate restaurant, Table at 7, and Aaron explains how it’s run by a Chinese woman and her Nordic partner. She cooks Asian fusion food, he cooks European fusion food, and the happy customer gets to enjoy a fusion of fusions, where all sense of where anything comes from becomes irrelevant.

Around a long table Aaron has assembled seven young Singaporeans, who work in government and design and writing and the arts (as with Aaron, such distinctions dissolve); very soon I can no longer keep track of who is theatre designer and who civil servant, their visions seem so much of a piece.

For the next four hours we talk about where the city’s soul is to be found, and what might be threatening it; what it means to be Singaporean, and the disparities that remain. My new friends have been educated at Sydney and the London School of Economics and MIT, and are pouring fresh global energies into their hometown; but they’re also keenly aware, maybe thanks to their time abroad, of how many in the city can never dream of travelling and struggle just to get through the day. Some locals, I hear, cannot afford even the ten dollars that would enable them to buy train passes that would quickly save them much more than ten dollars.

“Singapore is diverse not because it has a Little India,” says Cheryl Chung, a public policy expert turned teacher and artist. “It’s diverse because Little India is full of restaurants that are not Indian, as well as a Buddhist temple. Nearby there’s a Chinese Kuan Yin next to a Hindu temple. We talk of Chinatown, but really it should be ‘Everybody-town’.”

“Compared with a place like New York,” she continues, “we don’t have breadth. I tend to think about the diversity of Singapore as a shallow bowl, fragile and vulnerable to disruption as opposed to the larger absorptive quality of a place like New York.” On the other hand, I think to myself, Singapore has been bringing cultures together since long before most of us had ever heard the world “multiculturalism”.

“Look!” says Wendy Wong, a creative director, at just that moment. “We’re putting Peranakan chillis on French bread.” None of us has even noticed how naturally we’re mixing continents.

Outside, as I saunter back to my hotel close to midnight, the streets feel as stylish and loose, as festive as any I have seen, not quite Shanghai and not quite London, but more sultry and many hued than either. The tall chairs outside the pubs are full, couples are kissing on the bridge between the illuminated quays, tanned girls in very flimsy dresses are tapping impatiently on phones to make contact with tall boys whose shirts are unbuttoned.

I’ve heard the word “heritage” more often in Singapore than in anywhere I can remember; but these young and cutting-edge revellers are marching into a world where such words have to be redefined daily.

By the time I’m back in the Long Bar, on my way to the airport next day—Changi now sees five times more travellers than when I touched down in 1984—I finally have time to recall the motto of Raffles Institution, which still carries its founder’s coat of arms: auspicium melioris aevi. The hope of a better age, in effect.

The language in which it was written is dead. But the hope—more and more people are streaming into the new hotel around me, old and young, dark and blond, hip and highly retro—is very much alive. Home, quite beautifully, can be a creation of the future as much as of the past.

*** END OF THIS TEXT This Could Be Home ***

 