Title:Nothing Went to Plan And Other  
Author:Eileen Kay 
Gender of Author:Female 
Publication Year:2022
Publisher:Sabre Books London
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2022
Publisher of the Edition Used:Sabre Books London
Index Number: B097
Source Link:https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B09V82VDBH?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_2&storeType=ebooks 

*** START OF THIS TEXT Nothing Went to Plan And Other ***
 
CHAPTER I: In Obscurity, Thailand


January 2020


Happy New Year! 2020 is fun to type, like an intro to a cool drum solo. Combined with the metaphor of clear-sighted 2020 vision, inside and out, it is blissful, even sublime. I eagerly jumped on that new year, fizzing with the knowledge that it was also a new decade. Even better was the dawn of my third age: my senior years were real, silver-grey and accepted. I could reflect on a long, full and fascinating life so far, even with all the usual bumps, griefs, hospitalisations and nightmares along the way. I was half-retired and not yet sixty-five. I was grateful for plenty – including adequate health, despite only having the strength of a toothpick.

I’m not prone to making new year’s resolutions, but sometimes the spirit grabs me. This time I was seized with a pretty vision from my first days at elementary school, falling in love with the school library – a modest spare classroom with a few shelves for each year group. I loved the very concept of libraries, and eventually, I’d work in one, too.

Meanwhile, at the age of six, I estimated there were one million stories in that small town school library of J. Ackerman Coles Elementary, Scotch Plains, New Jersey, USA, in the year 1963. I wanted to read every book in there. I gave it my best try and got fairly close. I longed to learn to write. I had stories to write down, and more forming all the time. While absorbing my ABCs, I was a story-factory. School offered two out-loud formats. Show and Tell stories had to be true. Make Believe stories were made up. I loved both.

I reasoned then that if the school library had a million books, there was room for a few of mine. I would travel the big wide world and collect stories. That was the vision. It took the form of a row of books with my pen name on the spine, a different colour for each place or adventure. Now, as a senior, having just completed book three (a trilogy? A magic three? A comedy three!), the new question became: How many more books can I write in this lifetime, how many colourful spines along my bookshelf? I’d like to go on record, leave a trail. I have indeed travelled the world and collected lots of stories. It’s Senior Show and Tell.

Home was, and probably still is. southern rural Thailand – a story told in the first Noodle Trail memoir. I first went there about twenty years ago to escape the cold, grey, soggy Scottish winter. I started a Fair Trade business exporting jewellery, did the buying in Thailand every winter, returned each year for longer and longer, and eventually just stayed. When that business folded, I still stayed. I re-trained to teach English to foreign speakers, initially face to face and later online – a very fortunate change, and an ironic one – since I scowled at it, at first. Later this is what rescued me.

I’ve lived in various sorts of tropical huts along the way, some rattier than others. As for the current hut on the edge of a jungle, I forget exactly how long I’ve been there, and that in itself is pleasing. For nearly twenty years, I’ve succeeded in consistently avoiding both cold winter weather and its attendant commercial holiday campaigns – what I call the C-word week at the end of the year. It’s very pleasant to be in a warm part of Asia during the European winter. In particular, arthritically speaking, it’s a relief. Oldies head for the sun for very good reasons.

Those two decades, on average, were spent half in the East, half in the West. I love that pattern and am terribly attached to it, but things did not go to plan in 2020. The plan involved writing another book, and a book got written, just not the one I expected. It was this one, instead.



On New Year’s Day 2020, I was in Thailand, happily ensconced in what I call The Hut and what the landlords call a bungalow. It’s the closest thing I’ve had to a home in the last two decades. It’s the only room on this planet I pay for by the year, and which patiently waits for me to return, wherever I might roam. It has the feeling of a dear old trusty friend with a fine handsome protective dog. It is a beloved place. It is Home.

The Hut is a modest, one-room dwelling of plain loose planks and rough-hewn wood railings, surrounded by a large L-shaped balcony, up on stilts (above critters) and reached via steps (a steep ladder). In the back is a shower block (hot water, flush toilet!), and the kitchen with its one burner by a gas tank, which appears very dangerously set up. On the one hand, there’s a proper fridge-freezer; on the other hand, there’s no sink. Outside the wooden shutters is the Wilma Flintstone kitchen sink – in other words, a large flat tilted rock next to an external tap. There’s a big strong plastic tub for dishwater that then gets flung into the jungle. It’s a local custom for some kitchen scraps to get flung out there too. Papaya trees are always taller on that side of the house.

It was constructed, like the ten other bungalows nearby, personally by Mr and Mrs Landlord, whom I now love; they did this with minimal extra help, possibly while wearing flip flops, just the two of them. They are two people with one mind. Tough, capable people who were born and raised here, from the days when there was next to nothing but many more snakes.

Uphill is more jungle and a small river. There is generous space around each bungalow, so each tenant can sing without torturing anyone else. Downhill is a rough dirt track leading to the crumbling, almost two-lane road to the village and the bay, a couple of kilometres away. I call it Mai Island, and this area, Mai Bay Village.

Around the house are coconut, mango, papaya, lemon, cashew, banana and pod-bean trees, and lots of other delicious things. That, together with warmth and the sound of birdcall all day, is why I and many others call it paradise.

I had a comfortable, happy routine: writing in the morning, teaching in the afternoon, socialising in the evening. Mr and Mrs L were in the hut right next door. It was far enough away that no one could eavesdrop, but close enough that if I yelled “Snake!”, Mr L would appear in seconds wielding the appropriate implement, with Mrs L holding the torch. This has happened more than once. In fact, if I were to yell “Cobra!”, they’d be there even sooner, with an implement at the end of a very long bamboo pole, and a bag. We met most early evenings, after work but before dinner, for gossip and the amusement of mangling each other’s languages.

Every evening like clockwork, I cycled into the village. It was usually right before sundown, which was about the same time all year round, as is customary near the equator. In this area, nearly everyone else was on a motorbike, but not me. Partly this was due to my awareness of accident statistics. But also, cycling is one of the few forms of exercise I truly love – smooth and peaceful and good for the heart in every sense of the word. After sitting all day, it was so good to move. From my place to the village was one long gradual hill. It took five minutes to bike there, ten to return, fifteen with groceries or twenty by foot.

Most of the year was quiet. In the busy tourist season (European winter), it was a beehive of drunken, druggy idiots who turned it into another planet, a hallucinogenic Wild West in flip flops, which they trampled and partially destroyed, and where many people died or got injured riding motorbikes that hit sand or wild dogs or other unpredictable things. This was only for a few weeks or months, though. I tolerated the short-term tourists, waited for the quiet months, enjoyed the sight of coconut palms and the sound of monkeys, birds and singing lizards.

I relished my daily bike rounds and filled the homemade baskets with provisions – fruit in front, heavy stuff in the big, lidded box roped messily to the back. I took exactly the same clockwise loop around and through the village, waved at many of the same people in exactly the same order. Many of the kids had been my students at one time or another. Most of the teens, I’d known as tots. It’s a fabulous pleasure to know a village like that, and I want to believe I eventually earned a trusted place there.

Each evening I usually ate at the same place by the water, took a stroll up and down the pier where one did one’s gossiping, relaxing, dreaming, fishing. Neighbours. I was a regular, settled in, content. This routine evolved over those years.

By 1 January, I always felt relief to have the season over. I say this on behalf of The Rest Of Us who do Festivus, all non-Christmassy types for any or no reason. That last week of the year, and the lead-up, can be boring at best. At worst, one can encounter confrontation, coercion and even aggression. Fortunately, in Asia many Christmas shenanigans are available but optional and relaxed. Obviously they try to sell you things, but that’s always true. They just change the merchandise, bring out the latest in red hats, silly head-bands and other novelty props. Just as Jesus and Chinese factories would have wanted.

By the second day of January, I was already breathing easier. This year, I was happy, healthy and eager to pursue some heartfelt travelling plus writing plans. The word “plan” was soon to become permanently ironic.





The Annual Visa Run


January tasks in Thailand meant a very specific project. This was my annual application to the Immigration Office to extend my visa to continue to reside here. There was a series of preparatory exercises, which became more complex every year. It was a ritual. It was as complex as all rituals can be. It was also as sacred and ineffable. I’ve experienced different arrangements over the years and may have tried every template possible – there is an array of options.

This particular circus came to town every January. It wasn’t really a circus, but some aspects were freakily cryptic and inscrutable. It changed its rules and procedures regularly without warning or publication, and officials were allowed a fabulous amount of discretion, flexibility and other euphemisms. It was an adventure, and there were always uncharted waters.

I found old, incomplete websites with outdated information and forms. I made appointments with a clinic, the bank and Mr and Mrs L. I scanned the brains of many fellow foreigners who had recent experience with The Ritual – from my nation and no other, because agreements were different with each. I gathered my portfolio, piece by piece.

The excursion involved half a day’s travel to a provincial office and staying for a few days. One never knew how many. The earliest you could apply was two weeks before your deadline. This offered the dark benefit of giving you a full two weeks to leave the country, if it came to that. One had to have a Plan B if they suggested deportation. Anything was possible.

Then, I’d either leave the country forever and abandon most of my possessions, posting or carrying whatever I could. Or I could leave the country and somehow reapply to return – from Malaysia as one example. It was not best done in nearby Cambodia, Laos or Vietnam, historically not as chummy with the Thais. The general atmosphere of unpredictability lent a certain frisson to the whole proceedings, which spread over a couple of weeks. I used to pay someone to help, but now I run the gauntlet myself, with a wry sense of adventure.

One needed to present:

A form to apply.

A form to be able to leave and come back in.

A form to say you accept they can change the rules and there is no appeal.

A form to say your landlord has reported your presence to the police.

A medical certificate, no more than a week old.

Your bank book with a signed letter from the bank confirming the balance and the bank’s signed and approved statement for the last three months.

Your rental contract.

A Google-Earth style satellite map of your house with precise longitude and latitude.

A hand-drawn map showing exactly the route to your house (mine was colour coded and bi-lingual).

Your passport with at least six months before the expiry date.

Photos.

Cash.



I packed a bag for a week or a month or forever. I prepared The Hut so that I’d return ready to either kiss it or to kiss it goodbye. Then I locked up, dragged the case to the road, and waited for young Mr Et Taxi, while I dealt with a nervous clock ticking in both heart and bowels. He’d already taken his girl to school – I remember when she was a tot, too.

My Visa Runs customarily began with an undercurrent of melodrama, not entirely fabricated. The Immigration people can always say No. They need not explain why. It may work against you later if you even try to ask why, and that harshly worded rule upgrade appeared a mere few years ago. Whatever might happen, you had less than two weeks to deal with it.

Before a big trip, I always checked my will was in order – air travel always reminded me of mortality. I also found myself deciding what to take back to Europe for good – things of sentimental value. Some things had been here twenty years, and it was time to go home. I would not be in this hut forever. This was not a comfortable place to grow old. I was getting used to that idea.

I thought about who might live here after me, and that was always poignant. I wondered how fast Mr and Mrs L would clean and re-rent it. It’s only fair, I must admit, and they have been so good to me. Let them not lose any income on my account. They’d be the first to admit that my rent alone has financed several roofs on their newer bungalows. I happily helped build their feudal empire. This woman has taken me to the doctor and often given me foodie gifts – wonderful curries so spicy I had to water them down. They are not just good landlords but also nice neighbours.

Each annual Visa Run, I booked a different place to stay, somewhere simple and a healthy walking distance to Immigration. I travelled on a Sunday evening, dusted off that journey, ate well and had a beer, then arose early on Monday to deliver my portfolio. They may or may not deliver my fate a day or five after that. Meanwhile, I worked, read, looked for noodle bars and fresh fruit stands, and waited. Over the years, I’d built up a good repertoire of Local Usuals, meaning cheap, tasty eateries. Wherever I go, I determine my top five and that is my rota.





Insider Info Café


One lunch counter on a corner seemed to have different owners every year. Last time, I earned valuable insider knowledge. It was all because I spoke a little Thai with Miss Waitress and Mrs Manager. They were used to Immigration traffic. They knew their neighbours. They knew that besides this annual commitment, I had to report in every ninety days. They knew the drill very well indeed. They were both married to white foreigners, so they knew things from that angle, too.

I mentioned I had an appointment the next day at the hospital, as required for this visa. There were few approved hospitals. I avoided the costly private one nearby where they’d speak English, and went for the faraway municipal clinic where they didn’t. It would be cheaper and also a linguistic adventure. It’s always a novel experience to understand nothing when you are undressed and medical people prod and discuss you. I’ve done this before. It’s weird but possible.

Fate and these two friendly women steered me differently. They had a better idea, which sounded like a cheat. I’d been here long enough to know we were deep in the land of Unofficial Versions. There were always official and unofficial ways of doing anything. Therefore, this might be a scam, but it might be insider info. The trick was to know the difference, which was not possible for an outsider, so I hesitated.

They did seem genuinely nice. They explained: they and all their Thai girlfriends had old, white, probably fat unhealthy, husbands who also needed annual visas, and they all used the same clinic to obtain the necessary medical letter. It was not the official clinic, listed on the website, but it was cheap, quick, and sounded 100 per cent scam-like. I hesitated a second time. They almost rolled their eyes but politely restrained themselves, and that may be what convinced me they were sincere.

I decided to try it. If Immigration refused this fake speed-document, I still had an appointment at a real hospital the next day for a second try, for a real version.

I went straight to their recommended posh little clinic and mini-hospital. A handsome young man dressed and acting like a doorman at a five-star hotel opened the door of my cab and greeted me. The lobby was full, but no one waited long. Soon I was registered.

Like much private medicine and other businesses in Thailand, they charge white patients a substantially higher price than locals. It’s a sort of built-in subsidy they expect and extract from tourism. At this clinic, all us white folks were shepherded to the left, Thais to the right. A sound business and social model.

Someone quickly measured my height, weight, blood pressure – and nothing else. I saw the doctor for no more than one minute, in a completely empty room without so much as a stethoscope. This was the dialogue – either verbatim or very close.

“Hello, please sit down.” He held a letter, and glanced at me. “You look healthy. Do you feel healthy?”

“Yes.”

“Good.” He stamped the letter and signed it.

My jaw dropped. “Is that it?”

He almost disguised his irritation. “We can arrange a blood test – if you insist.”

“Sorry! I only want… whatever Immigration wants.”

He handed me the letter, calling, “Next.”

If I presented this ten-dollar wonder to the Immigration people, would they laugh? Be annoyed? Throw me out? Demand money? Arrest me, demand money, then deport me? There were endless possibilities, none of them pleasant and all of them expensive.





Begging to Stay


My portfolio was complete. The Immigration Office had the usual pile of shoes outside the door, dusty and hilariously diverse, right next to the sign in a few languages and clear pictures saying to keep your shoes on.

In general, that can be a fifty-fifty situation, depending on where you are, in Asian foot-centred cultures. In cities, of course, if you walk into a shop, you keep your shoes on. In a rural town, maybe not. In fact, perhaps that might be an offence. In anyone’s home it would surely be a huge offence. Here, though, the sign was clear as well as unread, and the staff were all in office shoes. Some of their groovier customers were barely dressed, filthily barefoot – and one could only hope that they’d showered recently.

Otherwise, it was the usual Kafkaesque labyrinth of bureaucracy. You waited and waited to hand in your forms, which you downloaded from the internet, but they were old forms, so they handed you new ones, and you started from scratch. Then you took another number to wait and wait. I had a book, and everyone had their phones. The toilets were mercifully, even miraculously, quite clean.

The lobby held the usual array of scruffy party people, muscled sporty types, groovy yoginis, super-healthy uber-vegans, white-haired retired couples, old white guys with young Asian chicks in tow, tour operators helping people speed things up, and the occasional oddball like me.

I handed in my stuff, bogus medical exam included. All was well with the Immigration clerk, who approved every item on the checklist. By the way, she did not care a damn that I spoke some Thai. She was strongly, thoroughly and ostentatiously unimpressed. But she accepted my pudgy folder that, over the years, had grown downright hefty. She said to come back in about two days.

I took a risk and cancelled the other appointment at the real hospital – who thanked me very much. They said no one ever told them about cancellations, and they thanked me again and again. A little courtesy goes a long way in this culture.

Clearly, this private clinic had an understanding with Immigration. The secret entrance key was a Thai-speaking connection and approval. Even if just momentarily, I was on the inside, feeling like an honoured guest. Meanwhile, I tried not to worry. I hung out in the bungalow, worked, read and tried new eateries. And obviously, I went back to the Insider Info Café and thanked them. We all said, “See you in ninety days”, which was the usual next check-in.

This was not to happen. The following year, that place was closed.





The Evening Meal


This gives some of the flavour of the neighbourhood, quoted from my journals at the time:

Small place, thatched roof. Six bamboo tables, no condiments, dusty plastic flowers. Old banner pictured eight top dishes, all printed very green – pictures of fish, meat, soup – all green.

It faced a busy, dusty, noisy road, which was dangerous and difficult to cross. Nearby were a couple of pharmacies and shops with plastic beach toys. Tourists’ first two needs.

The teen daughter-waitress who delivered her mother’s cooking had a great smile and could not hear anything I said, thanks to her earbuds and her cool, upbeat, popular-teenage-girl-in-pink music. I asked for fish sauce with chillies, a condiment that’s usually on the table like our salt and pepper. She brought a small plastic sachet. That’s takeaway cheap. But she had a wonderful, winning smile.

There was beer on the menu but not in the fridge, so her dad sauntered to a corner shop and brought one back, also with a winning smile. Winning smiles make everything OK.

The music was old Country & Western classics covered by Asian musicians who may not have heard the original. “Country Roads”, “Wichita Lineman”, “Rhinestone Cowboy”. Often these imitations are shockingly accurate, but perhaps these were cheaper compilations. They sounded almost OK yet slightly off, as a general style. It’s fine with me that surrealism is on the menu.

There was a black cat who lurked, but was not overly friendly. Not mean, just aloof.

The cook was a lovely woman with remarkably long, thick straight hair that seemed to sway as one whole unit. I felt sure that she had never worn a hairnet or pulled it back, and I was even more sure that there had never once been a hair in the food.

I like places like this. Brits call it cheap and cheerful. However, here’s a sad thing, and I have seen this countless times here, with a heavy heart and yearning belly. In just about any eatery here, you may catch a glimpse of the area where the whole restaurant family eats their own dinner. This is when you might see something of a revelation.

They may share a minimum of five or six dishes, all looking and smelling complex, beautiful and absolutely nothing like the simple, now crude-looking fare they just served you, the outsiders. I have tried asking for these dishes, but it is an unwritten rule that these are for Them Only. We cannot eat like or with them, unless we are invited into their homes, and that doesn’t happen very often. It was many years before local women threw me a bone.

If they must eat with you, you’re more likely to go out for a meal. Be warned: whoever is oldest is expected to pay for everyone. That is their custom and I wish someone had warned me the first time. So, be careful which invitations you accept, ye of greying hair.

Still, even the worst Thai food is better than most food anywhere. My dinner was just fine – in fact, it was quite good – so I offset that by buying terrible, nasty snacks to take back to the room.

I was hoping for good luck with the red tape the next day. I was hoping to be granted another year under a warm sun.





Icky Fauna Report


For a balanced view, maybe now is a good time to talk about creepy-crawlies. What follows are some highlights and lowlights of Thai fauna, icky or otherwise. They’re a big part of life here.

Top fearmongers: Scorpions (bites don’t kill but hurt like hell), snakes (many, from lethal to wormlike), giant centipedes (cannot kill but the bite is painful), box jellyfish (painful or lethal or both). Mosquitoes may carry dengue fever (common and terrible) or malaria (not so common but terrible, and allegedly it never goes away).

None of the spiders can hurt you, although some look like they could. I did see a tiny tarantula once, but that must have been a freak aberration. I don’t know how it got into my kitchen, but by the time I grabbed the frying pan to crush it, it disappeared and I never saw it again. That pan hangs at the ready, by the way, at all times. It’s dented and well-used – mostly for the scorpions, who favour the edges of the kitchen.

There are gorgeous, chattering birds, some with hysterical shrieks. There are singing geckos that sound like cartoon cuckoos. There is every sort of peaceful lizard and no biters unless you vex them. There are endless rivers of cute toads and frogs.

A favourite is the “oong-ang”, or Banded Bullfrog. Thousands of them are my neighbours. Sweet but slimy, they often get into my shoes, so I’m habitually diligent about checking. They congregate in a few neighbouring swamps. When conditions are right, thousands bellow out for a mate, as deafening as any nightclub. Perhaps somewhere there’s a nightclub called the Bullfrog Swamp. You’d know what you’re getting into: a meat-market orgy on lily-pads.



There are amazing butterflies and dragonflies galore. There are monkeys. And as for flora and food, don’t get me started with tropical fruit – there are glorious mountains of that.



Meanwhile near Immigration, on the last hour of the third working day, good fortune came to me. A smiling young assistant official gave me leave to remain in the Kingdom of Thailand. I thanked her good and properly and I think she felt the sheer humility of it, a thing of which they approve. She even wai’ed me (hands clasped together in respect), which was sweet and beyond the call of duty. They sometimes do that for well-behaved seniors.

I smiled all the way home.

This was what I wanted, another year of living that childhood dream of a life of travelling, later to settle into a quiet, simple hut in a green, warm place, where I could quietly write my memoirs, earning that privilege by performing the badly paid and unappreciated service of teaching. And here it was, that life, right in front of me, on stilts above critters, with a hammock on the balcony and a bike underneath, with chilli plants and runner beans in the garden. It was a tiny slice of paradise, snakes included. This was Home, for now.





CHAPTER II The Wall of Plans


The Rest of January 2020


I was jubilant on my way home from the Visa Run, euphoric I could stay one more year. I sped back to my routine, my dreams, my mosquito net. Touchingly, when I first clapped eyes on The Hut, my heart jumped. Inside, I called out, “Home! I’m home!” It was instantaneous and joyous, and it took me aback. I called it Home? This was evidence: this was Home. For now. For another year, anyway.

That old saying “wherever you hang your hat is your home” is true. What’s more, home is where I can talk to myself and sing without a care, and where most of my time is devoted to writing things down. Wherever that happens, that’s home.

Now my annual Thai Immigration dance card was already booked for January 2021, exactly one year from now. I could breathe. I need not flee. I could relax, unpack and resume daily tasks like checking under the bed for snakes. Everything was back to normal. I had plans. I had a row of books to write.

I was halfway through my six-month stay here, a whole season in front of me. Projects were going well, with a few in development, their notes all over the wall, which I’d started calling The Wall. In that little one-room place, only one wall sufficed as a notice board, but it was the entire wall, plastered with notes, sometimes in layers, and changing all the time.

For the last few years, it had been covered with materials to do with my Hungarian ancestry research, most of which was published in my second book, My Secret Century in Budapest, in 2019. Those old notes had been peeled away, now serving as scrap paper. Gone were the dozens of lists, maps and questions. Gone was the massive, seething, tangled ancestral tree and the 200-year timeline. There was still a corner for it. Some of it would always be ongoing. There were lingering questions, cousins still unaccounted for, and still a sweet longing to see Budapest again, my friends and family and favourite nooks. But investigations were slow. It’s possible there’s not much more to unearth. Only a quick visit to Budapest was in the plans.

Did I say plans?



In the meantime, the current season’s list for the next book or ten:

How I moved to a hut in Thailand (done).

Long-lost cousins, a family tree discovered, and falling in love with Budapest (done).

Twenty years in London (next).

Ten years in Scotland (ooh, maybe that’s next – hmm, tough call).

Continued adventures in a Thai jungle hut (already started, halfway to a first draft, calling it a novel to talk freely about drugs, sex trade, etc.)

Continued adventures in ancestral Hungary (there’s bound to be more gossip later, it will accrue).

I’d love to meet Puerto Rico and Cuba (holy goodness, yes please?)

A new adventure I haven’t thought of yet. Something other than a memoir. Something that’s nothing to do with me. The right story would get instant top priority.

Speak for someone or a group who have no voice. Search them out. That’s your homework.

This list has changed before and it will change again. That’s not the point: keep writing.



“My Twenty Years in London” was the project grabbing me now. My first grown-up working years were spent there, and it was a big step in my childhood plan to see the world. It was the foundation of many wonderful travels to follow. On a recent visit, I dragged out of dusty storage (thank you, Moxie) a stack of ancient diaries, brittle letters and mysterious miscellany from the 1980s and 1990s, when London was my home. It felt like a time bomb, or maybe a time capsule. It was like a note in a bottle I sent to my future grey-haired self from my faraway youth in a crummy bedsit in Camden, London NW3. It had magical mystery tour written all over it.

Last year, I posted it all in one heavy box back to The Hut, via Tiny in the village. Tiny was a large Italian man who was the unofficial post office for many expats in the area. He even delivered it, clattering up our dirt track on his motorbike with the sidecar, normally stacked with produce for his restaurant, but occasionally with a parcel for a pal. We joked that his Italian friends always sent food, but I sent books. This time, I explained these were papers – old diaries, notebooks and letters – to make into my next book. It was damned heavy and we lifted it out with a groan and a thump.

“There are lots of stories in there,” I said.

He laughed and said, “I believe you!”, and clattered back down the stony path.

I had not looked at these diaries and letters since I wrote them, nearly forty years earlier. I was saving them for just such a time as this semi-retirement. There were bound to be both funny and un-funny shocks in there. It got sorted and indexed, subdivided by decade and year, cross-referenced with jobs and moves.

My youthful move to London was life-changing. It led to my becoming a British citizen decades later, and I did not see that coming. What I knew was I’d been offered a golden rare chance, and I did not hesitate. I was particularly thankful for the opportunity to emigrate and not have to learn a whole new language – just a completely different way of using the one I already spoke. I was willing to try. I was not totally green but close to it, aged about twenty-four when I first moved there.

Before that, I was in Japan for an amazing half year. Then I was in the Middle East for a wonderful two years. But, the deep thrill of moving to London was the very serious potential to stay there for a lifetime, to grow old there, a “forever-home”. I could travel a bit, and always come back there. This was the dream. I had a many-decade vision. And hope. And youthful desperation.

Much of my 2020 wall became the London project. There was the twenty-year timeline (1980–2000), lists of things to do, people to hug, places I never got to see in those twenty years and want to see now. It was last-chance time. Besides spending time in friends’ kitchens, the places list included the Chelsea Physic Garden, Freud’s House and Hampstead Ladies’ Bathing Pond. If you have any suggestions for eccentric, unknown delights in London, please send them. If this were your last visit there, what would you do?

Of course, there were maps: city centre, Underground, bus routes. London by post codes – and there are a lot, colour coded by compass point. London borough by borough. I gazed and gazed and gazed, absorbing the details, imagining possible plans. This would be my love letter to London disguised as a typically English, ironic and polite thank you note. It was a hundred pages toward a first draft.

Then Brexit happened and things went backward. I knew it would, but the actual day – 31 January 2020 – hit me like a sledgehammer.

After all the delays and stupid confusion, it was official. I wanted to remain in the EU. I knew Brexit would cause huge damage, in many ways, except for the ultra-wealthy who wanted to avoid EU taxes. Yet, I could not have predicted my own personal reaction on the actual day. It was very emotional, far more than I’d have expected. It was like facing the fact we were trapped in an abusive household, and we had to stay with the abuser. We were stuck with sadistic, heartless Dad, not protective, trustworthy Mum. Against all logic and intellectual or political cool, and even though I was one of the lucky ones who was working like before, still, I was scared, angry, upset, insulted, depressed and more – none of it good.

Suddenly I was seriously not in the mood for tales of London, or researching books about England and Englishness, which I’d been collecting. True, London is not at all representative of the rest of England, but the overlap was unavoidable. Inside I said a temporary goodbye to London and all things English, and I never thought I’d feel that way – never. And yet, here we were.

This blow was in addition to the current UK government ripping off many people in my age group. Suddenly lifelong promises and contracts could be broken. A government could steal six years of your pension, and then offer you the chance to “buy them back”, the same way a street thug steals your hubcaps and “sells” them back to you.

If I went back again, I’d return to Scotland, first and foremost, where I spent a decade after London. Scotland was a whole different kettle of fish, and I missed it. After Brexit, I noticed that I stopped using the phrases UK or United Kingdom. I didn’t deliberately decide. I just couldn’t bring myself to say it. There was no UK, other than an Un-United Kingdom. Instead of EU, we got FU, a Forced Union.

I peeled all London things off the wall, every biscuit. I did love my twenty years there and I’ll write London the love letter and thank you note it deserves, just not now, not while we’re rowing. Years from now, I’ll write it then.

There came a reshuffle on The Wall, and Scotland moved into first place. I wish Scotland were independent and could re-join the EU. I don’t know if I’ll see this in my lifetime but, thank heavens, I’ve been wrong before, so why not this time too? I now dreamed of establishing a base there again; with luck, it would be near where I was before. Maybe it should be a crummy little bedsit, for old times’ sake.

I was happily settled into my ten years in Scotland and hadn’t left willingly. Finances, or rather lack of them, had pushed me over the edge of that damned recession of 2008. It drove me to a silver lining in a cheap Thai hut, plus a life of annual migrations, but I missed my Scottish network. I knew loads of friendly folk up there. My plan was to go in the summer to search for a room to rent, and create a little base for myself there. This fantasy also required that I magically acquire a compact one-woman-sized campervan (a very old dream, that one), and go see the rest of Scotland I hadn’t seen before, which was most of it. I’d need more than a few months.

The map went up and pins went in. This map was a beauty – a huge, lovely thing with every highland and island, which I transported here from London with great care in a tough cardboard tube. It would be hard to choose which islands to visit, that’s for sure.

It was a beautiful dream. It’d make a fine book. The new wall was getting full.

By the time Scotland got chilly, I’d head back here to re-join The Hut lizards. Six months to travel and keep a journal about it, then six months to write a book about it. Perfect. The six-monthly migration pattern was on track.

In the meantime, in the tropics, trying to think ahead and plan all that, it was weird to absorb humidity and mosquitoes while planning on going to a freezing place soon. I asked the Euro-cousins and friends what winter clothes I had left there last year, if any. None of us could remember, but I had surprise bags stowed with a few generous pals. There were a few rows of books waiting for me too, that was the main thing.

Local routines carried on. I awoke with the light, wrote until lunch and taught until supper. Before supper, I second-showered and visited Mr and Mrs L, where I was often fed fruit while we tromped through each other’s languages like cartoon wild bulls through a garden. I biked to the village. Going downhill, a favourite game was to get some speed up and freewheel it from the archery place past Sleepy Black Dog Garage, and on a good run past the checkerboard bridge.

I did my rounds, waved at the usual sequence of neighbours and ex-students, filled the baskets, did dinner and pier and pals, all as usual. I pedalled home and went to sleep earlier than any of the party people.

Every Sunday evening, there was a market at the pier. I went like religion. I had a regular list of things I got each week, and also always hunted for something different, every time. This week’s newbie item was a round root vegetable called Yam Bean or Mangeo. Spanish speakers call it Jicama (“Hee-kama”). They’re appley, crunchy, juicy and refreshing. You cut them into strips and dip them in things, the same as carrots or celery.

Dipping apples into powdered cacao (thank you, Cousin Vera) was a revelation to me. I must say, very little in my mouth has ever surpassed that combination. Cacao with chilli might.

Customarily, at this market I bought stuffed dumplings, sticky rice with mango with coconut sauce, and sushi. There were better fruit and vegetables than on weekdays. Greens were fresher, especially the morning glory (great fried with garlic) and baby white aubergines (tender in curry). I never cooked on market day, or the day after, and I tried to stuff the freezer. I sometimes also succumbed to fried chicken or shrimp, or both. There was a new curry woman, and two new bread and sandwich grandmas. But no fried bananas, dang! In short, the main themes were overeating, open-mindedness and deep fat frying.





A Short Word About Nickname Systems


Thai people usually give themselves and everyone they know a short nickname – one syllable, ideally. It could be ironic like with Tiny the big guy, or Oh La the German. It could be arbitrary like View, Index, Pond. It could be sweet like Star, Queen, Flower. I’ve met a Wit, a Go and a Bee. It could be anything that’s short.

This is different from the usual restaurant system for simply identifying customers visually, like “This goes to Miss Red Hair, and that to Mr One Leg.”

Other times, it’s just your job. There was a Boss, a Cook, a Nurse. For a while I had no nickname, and was informed that the village had not yet decided. Then they decided I was Teacher, which was so for many years. Then I was promoted to The Teacher. Now, many years later, to most people, I am just Eileen, and that’s my first choice. But, biking through the village each day, what I usually heard sung out was “Hello Teacher!”

Here in this book, the nicknames I assign to others are purely to keep it clear who’s who in the story, and what is their main feature or function.



I had two more months to go here for my stint this year. Next month was February, a short month, and I still had most of March. Then friends and family awaited in Europe (yes and also London and Scotland), when the worst of the cold would be over.

What a nice plan.





FEBRUARY


Plans Change





CHAPTER III Doubts and Dominoes


February 2020


I was enjoying the sweet, settled comfort of an agreeable routine. I had two whole months to play with and had work to do as usual. I was looking forward to the next big trip to the other hemisphere, the other half of the year and what felt like the other side of the moon. Meanwhile, knowing days were ticking away, I gratefully relished all the many enjoyable – or at least unique – aspects of living near a jungle.

This area’s three seasons are hot, even hotter, and hot and wet. The last came with high gales, occasionally destructive or dangerous, easily blowing motorbikes off the road. This month, we were probably safely out of the worst of stormy monsoon time.

We were also past the highest humidity season, where you felt like a dumpling slowly steaming, all day, day after day and week after week, until your skin felt like soggy pastry that might crumble and flake to the floor. It could be wearing.

Dry season – its occasional total lack of drinking water and other conveniences – was not due for a few months. That was the season of Thai New Year, coinciding with European spring. It started with a big water festival precisely when water was scarcest and the heat was unabated, and no one ever saw the paradox of it.

Contrary to established patterns, recently we’d had a freakishly super-hot and dry few weeks, to the point that brush fires were a danger. But locals customarily had small, controlled brush fires from time to time, preventing the kind of build-up of undergrowth which fires love. I had my own version a little too close to the house, and ended up flinging buckets of water off the balcony, but disaster was averted, eventually.

I routinely cleared dead undergrowth anyway, little by little, for daily exercise. There was plenty of vegetation surrounding the bungalow, and it grew at an alarming rate. What motivated me to do regular clearances was once finding a large king cobra skin – empty and snakeless, but still, too near the house for comfort. It was kissing the exterior of the kitchen wall. Not much ever rattled Mr L, who often and easily dealt with deadly things, sometimes barefoot. However, when he saw that skin, he gasped. That was alarming.

We hacked down all such inviting undergrowth and I’ve tried to continue snake-proofing ever since. I invested in a smaller version of his “prah”, a long, slightly curved strong knife, secured to a long wooden pole. I went out there every day after work to swing it in sweeping musical arcs, winning the praise of Mr and Mrs L and neighbours uphill.

They were perfect neighbours. In the evenings, talk sometimes turned to knives and tools. My baby prah was teased for her delicate size, less than a foot (or 30cm) long. Mr L thought it was silly and cute. I thought it was a dangerous statement of power in my hands. Anyway, I cleared brush like a good tenant and they were happy.

One day, while thrashing away some underbrush, I was swinging that thing left and right like a guillotine blade on a pendulum, when suddenly the metal part flew off the handle and sailed away in an arching trajectory, landing somewhere in a deep thicket. I fetched a hand tool (not as effective) and slowly thwacked my way downhill until, finally, I retrieved my precious implement of destruction.

Of course, Mr and Mrs L loved this story and laughed merrily. I brought the two pieces to them, and Mr L turned his expert eye to the situation. They really were expert eyes. This man could stand on the distant top of our mountain and count how many chillies his wife put into the curry pot. I saw him stop chatting to watch a flock of birds so far away they were tiny dots, following their path for a minute, then saying, “Rain will come, three days, maybe four.” And it did. Always.

These keen eyes examined my prah/billhook/scythe/whatever this tool was, and he reminded me that hitting rocks was not a good idea. Now look here, readers, I know this and I try not to, but accidentally I smack rocks when the weeds are waist-high and I’ve no idea where boulders are hidden. It was rough ground, and steep, with a thousand ways to break an ankle. Mr L considered all the little nicks in the metal that his eye could see, and mine never would. He found some glue, put the pieces together, and we hoped that would do it.

His prah was over twice the size of mine, and had a heavy girth too. I took a closer look, and now I knew the type I would buy next time. It had a tiny hole through which a screw held it to the handle. Mine did not. The head was shoved on by pressure. Silly me, I should have seen that before.

Meanwhile, Mrs L served me a large half coconut, and again used terminology I could not remember. They have many words for coconuts, parts of coconuts, and all the many stages of ripeness from milk to flesh and in between. This one was at a halfway stage, some flesh soft and sweet, the rest tough and resistant to my spoon.

Mr L took that heavy implement which can split logs, gave it a clean and then, with the delicate finesse of a surgeon, he used its tip to gently prise off all the rest of the coconut flesh, in one whole undamaged slab.

These are skilful people. These are good neighbours to know in coconut-land.





Weather Changes, Inside and Out


Now that I was safe and sound in the world of legal visas – for a year, anyway – it was easier to think of longer-range issues. There were some troubling questions, doubts and worries bubbling up inside my inner jungle Hut. This past season here was different from the twenty preceding. This asked to be noticed. It was the result of a creeping change over a long time. I could now see patterns that ramped up in ten years, slowly ramping back down in the next ten. The main difference was that, before, I had known loads of people and had loads of company. Now I hardly knew anyone.

Here’s an illustration. The first time I spent my birthday here, local pals hosted an intimate dinner for me, them and a couple of other friends. The next year was similar with more people, including the future Mr and Mrs Landlord. It became a thing with more people each year, until about the ten-year mark. Then they started to drift away, for various reasons. That’s typical of any expat village within a village. Every ten or fifteen years, there’s almost a total turnover. And so, in the following ten years, each birthday dinner became more and more intimate again. It was at that point I was about to turn sixty and wanted to celebrate that big day in the city of my ancestors. That’s when my whole friendship with Budapest began. My sixtieth birthday was there, which was the start of a new era – although I did not know it at the time.

In tropical hut vacation-land, disappearing English-speaking friends and neighbours made the scene boring or even depressing. I didn’t like to admit that. It seemed churlish to be even momentarily grumpy while you enjoyed a hot coconut paradise, even if there were snakes and no pals. But, in truth, unless I sat in bars, brothels or nightclubs, there were fewer and fewer people to talk to. Even those few remaining might be gone soon.

I spoke enough Thai for good neighbourliness and simple acquaintanceships, but not for much more. That was a painful failure. I’ve never been as quick at languages as I’d wished. When I can make it funny, I’ll write more on that topic in a later chapter. Right now, these ingredients are not in the fridge.

It’s also difficult and/or very expensive to get health care as a foreigner, after the age of seventy. This added to the creeping feeling that no, I would not be here right to the end. That’s what I had dreamed in the beginning, but not now. That was startling, a deep let-down, the kind that weakens your knees. It was not a “forever-home”. I’d need to seek another way to warm my cold bones in winter, plus avoid the annual plague of Santa hats. Is it heartbreak time? I don’t want to say goodbye to pretty Thailand just yet.

Still, there’d been a change of heart, the kind that doesn’t go away. In previous years, when packing to leave for many months, I tried to stay until the last moment, and had trouble pulling myself away. This time, I was eager to get back to Europe as soon as possible. It was puzzling me, somehow.

What a funny-looking potato to ladle out of the soup.



Meanwhile, from the other side of the world came another angle, with my cousins in Vienna. This was the branch I had only discovered a few years ago, to everyone’s delight and amazement. Andreas (Apu) was my second cousin – his gran and my grandpa were siblings. He’s an Auschwitz survivor, retired professor, good cook, wicked wit and a sharp conversationalist. We’d enjoyed many a visit together, and had a pattern of them. I was friendly with his daughter Vera and her offspring too. When I left them last autumn, we’d planned my next trip for this spring, in late March, in time for my birthday. But Apu’s ninety-first birthday was at the beginning of the month. And, it was sad to notice his email sign-off custom had changed. Before, he’d ended communications by saying he looked forward to meeting in the spring. Gradually this morphed into saying he hoped for it. He called his upcoming birthday his hundredth birthday, because the last few years had aged him that much.

I started having a change of heart and also an inner tug of war. Eventually, I changed my plans and went earlier. I’m glad now that I did, for many more reasons than I could see then. At that point, absurd amounts of ambivalence went into this seemingly simple change of plan, which to this day I find puzzling. There was great inner turbulence, confusion and indecision, coupled with an intense desire to take action, but I had no idea what kind of action. I was just tired of mentally running in circles ranting and questioning and searching for something I could not yet name. To try any old damned thing would be better. That’s not a great motive but it was the best I had to hand and, finally, it did the trick.





A Possible Snag


There was another possible snag. There were stories in the news about a virus getting out of hand in China. Maybe it was another bird flu or swine flu or similar. Early in January came the first reports, then a death, then by the end of the month, millions of Chinese people were in quarantine.

It made a mess of their New Year, one of the biggest human migrations on the planet, this time in honour of the Year of the Metal Rat, not my favourite image. By the end of January, infections were reported in fifteen other countries, and the UK was repatriating its citizens from China. The city of Wuhan was now dubbed Ground Zero.

In February, the first death outside China was reported. The end of February was when I was due to leave Bangkok for Europe. Should I cancel, and stay here? It was a chaotic, emotional decision that I had to make without enough information, but I decided to go. That hit the nail on the head. A physical relief unburdened my shoulders: yoke off, decision made, path chosen. Suddenly I felt wonderful and lucky and eager and happy. Why had I felt so emotional before? Why all the inner conflict? It was just one trip. But not so – one domino can change a lot. And so can a pandemic. At the start of the Corona Era, few of us knew that’s what it was.

The message from Thai officials was clear: if you’re going back to Europe, the sooner you go, the better.

That rang alarm bells. I booked my flight. I needed to get ready. Soon I was leaving for six months – or forever.

Suddenly things were moving quickly. I was packing up a whole house, not in two months but two weeks. I needed to be ready for anything. I always got nervous but excited when the annual ritual began. I packed up The Hut as if I’d never see it again. Six months later, I’d return to hose off the many layers of gecko excretions and start the second half of the cycle. An annual cycle needs a certain sort of vision. You need a minimum of two decades to see a pattern.

Apu and company agreed to my arriving a month early.

Dear Eileen!



I am really delighted that we can celebrate my 91st together!

Agi [his wife] is feeling bad from day-to-day and unfortunately also notices her brain is not working. And she suffers a lot from it. And of course I suffer with it. I don’t know how it will go on. And so I rarely write because I could only complain and I don’t want that.



With cousin hug: Andreas

They warned me of snow, while I was still dealing with all-day rivers of sweat. I don’t mind sweat – far from it. I was not ready for a frozen Vienna. Vera would meet me at the airport with the winter coat she’d loaned me last year.

The virus update was not encouraging. Everyone was drowning in rumours and confusion, and there were a hell of a lot of conflicting messages. Asian and European sources were not on the same page. Britain and the EU were not on the same page. Scientists and believers and businesspeople and politicians were all on separate pages. There was a lot of reading and wild-guessing to be done.

As pundits wondered whether this could mushroom into a major quarantine situation, like many people, I pondered this question: if borders were closed, and if I had to get trapped somewhere, which trap would I choose? In that moment, I chose the trap with strudel.

I hoped to go, and feared I might not.



Let me share a glimpse of my 2020 canoe before it got blown out of the water.

Despite everything else, the local daily routine chugged on. I worked during the day, visited the Landlords later for linguistic mixed salad, biked to the village and did my rounds. I checked out Mrs Sweet Fruit for any new mangoes, got standard fare from Mrs Aloof Vegetables, and got miscellany with Mrs Central Grocery.

I ate most nights at Nong’s, where good basics are cheap and cheerful, plus we always had a chat if she had time. They did high-class fish, which cost more, and I never got that. Every time I arrived, the restaurant team (her family plus Burmese help) played a game to guess my choice of the day. I tended to stay within a six-plate menu. On the rare days I added a beer, they either applauded or feigned shock.

My after-dinner rounds went by Mrs B, nicknamed for her bookshop and bike shop. Later there might be another inspection of the pier and social centre. On the way home, I passed the pancake guy and the sausage people and, years ago, I would sometimes weaken. Nowadays, my weakening happened with the slow-roasted succulent duck guy, new on the corner.

There was the junk food place, roast chicken stall and some pickup trucks with the back open and a small mountain of fruit, all one kind, all picked on local mountains that day. There were ladies with a card table and little goodies which were sweet and snacky, and made from some of that very fruit. Mrs L did this and sold in bulk to marketeers.

I might or might not know people to wave at, or even visit, at the Anglo Bar and also the Other Euro Bar. I still knew some of the restaurateurs, so there was a shout to the Italian place with pizza, a wave to the Italian place with fish, and as for the Italian place with the fine chef, we had more civilised cups of coffee in the morning. Before, it could take a while to visit my way back home, but now most places were filled with strangers. These were not the cliché strangers who were merely friends you haven’t met yet. No, these were tourists you’d never see again.

The pedal home always took longer. It was slightly uphill and I was heavier with groceries, inside and out. I played a game where I tried to get past the second bridge, the checkerboard one, without going down a gear. This was the barometer for my fitness. The bike only had two gears, slow and slower. It was a heavy old Chinese thing, a bulky frame that used to hold an electric motor, now gone. It made me work.

Other nights, I strolled the bike home, one hand on the handlebars and the other feeding myself cheap snacks tucked in the front basket. The usual bike lights never seemed enough, and there was an astonishing number of road accidents around here, few of them minor, many not reported in statistics. So, I adapted a couple of intense, large desk lamps to the purpose. These were rough roads, sometimes sand-covered and often subject to ambushes of semi-wild dogs. I was scared and vigilant and very well lit.

The walk home passed Uncle Coffee (Mrs L’s nephew, retired now), often on his veranda with guests. He never failed to wave and call out a cheery greeting in his excellent English. This was a rare and admirable achievement, given the great difference between our two languages.

In a place as rural as this, one could see many more stars. I love cities for other reasons, but when I’m in a city, I miss a starry sky.

At home at last, I would get under the mosquito net, my child’s tent. I miss my tent when sleeping in other parts of the world, where they leave their mattresses uncanopied and symbolically vulnerable to invaders.

Customarily I’d worry a moment about cartoon snakes biting their way through a mosquito net, in a horror-film vengeance scenario. I’d already checked underneath the bed, before getting in. Fortunately, a mosquito net tent is magic protection against all harm. I’d then ease myself into drowsiness and hope to awake before the light.

I’ll miss it. But I’ll be back in six months.





CHAPTER IV Thailand Goes into Storage


The Rest of February 2020


The annual ritual was afoot, the Persephone game. The daughter of Zeus and Demeter legendarily spent half the year in Hades, half the year on earth. My division was between hot Asia and warm Europe. I was more than happy to flee Europe at the first sign of a cool breeze, and zing back to the land of high humidity and bold cobras.

On my return to The Hut after six months away, I would always find it filthy beyond camping and almost indistinguishable from the great outdoors. Every surface would be sticky with a dried syrupy layer of gecko urine and more you would not want to investigate. Life consisted of a lot of scrubbing and laundering for a week or two. This was a small price to pay for the privilege of hearing monkeys that sound like birds and vice versa. There were creatures called tokay lizards that sound like demented cartoon cuckoo birds, and that’s not a joke. Nearly every house had one, if not a family. Is that not irresistible?

Once all the many layers of filth were dispatched eventually in a series of rigorous sluices, and my own fragrance re-installed, big critters stayed away. The tokays came and went as usual, sleeping on the ceiling as they do, dropping the occasional tail when startled. Rather than crapping around the place randomly (only around the edges), soon they would reaccept my toilet room as theirs, where everything was hose-able and that made us co-habitable. They also ate mosquitoes, a great blessing, lowering your chances of getting either dengue fever or malaria. Or stupid itchy annoyances.

Twenty years of attachments, sentimentality and romanticism about this home away from home, singing lizards included, had to be packed into storage too. But it was only for six months, or so I thought.

The rituals of this hut evolved gradually over nearly twenty years, so they were detailed and proven. At the same time, in other ways, they were also still evolving as they went along. It was like Franz Kafka wrote: “Leopards break into the temple and drink the sacrificial chalices dry; this occurs repeatedly, again and again; finally it can be reckoned upon beforehand and becomes part of the ceremony.”

For the first decade, my impulse was to feather the nest, so clutter accumulated. In the second decade, I started stripping it away little by little, more each year. Things went to the trash. Things got recycled. Gifts were presented all over the village, and at The Hut, there were more bonfires than usual.

Clothing got donated as usual to the temple. Mrs B knew the lady who quietly organised these things for those in need. The B family is a big part of that temple and the village community. I’ve known them ever since I first arrived and rented a bike from them that I later bought. Her youngest son and his friends were only four when their mothers organised what they, the mothers, called The Monkey Group, for English language learning. Her Younger Monkey was a strapping teenager now. Around the village, he greeted me sweetly if no one was around, and we ignored each other in front of his friends. We agreed on this policy, wordlessly.

Older Brother Not A Monkey was the academic pride of his age group; he won an international science prize and I braggily state that I coached the speech he made to thousands while representing his nation in Los Angeles. Now he’s not just at uni, he’s at The Uni, which here means Chulalongkorn, in Bangkok, the Oxbridge of Thailand.

After dinner, I often biked to them, sat on the bench or the swing, gossiped with Mrs B in a mish-mash of combined languages, waved goodbye until next time. Neighbour stuff. This is what I miss when away. This is why it never felt like simply closing up for half a year. It felt like rehearsing for when I never come back. I’d never thought that before, but it was now firmly on the menu. I tidied differently, with this new long-range possibility.

That week, turbulent emotions swirled like a hurricane laced with tornadoes. This was all while doing a comprehensive domestic spring-clean and full inventory, while working as usual and arranging for a many-step migration. Alone.

Correspondingly – often the case – there was a distinct lack of journal writing or reportage going on. When life is full, I stop writing and I pay full attention. Recording of any kind must wait. Does anyone young do this, ever? A true obsessive would never skip a day, and would record everything, every breath. I am no such obsessive. But my diary entries never cease for long.



Leaving The Hut for six months, I didn’t trust myself to pack properly this time. When I’m distracted, accuracy and competence drop like stones in a pond. I needed multiple double-checks to avoid stupidities. But at least I knew myself well enough to add the extra checks, so at least one slice of my brain was still operating.

A better example of this was from a shocking car wreck I had, long ago, right before a long flight. I was basically unhurt but in shock for weeks, walking shakily with a brain like porridge. I do not remember packing. I did it strangely. I hadn’t packed much clothing, so I had to buy basics on arrival. Instead, there were electrical and sound leads, adapters and unrelated technical components, none of them needed. My own internal circuits must have taken a beating and, clearly, some wires were loose. I was so wobbly, I bought a tall umbrella to use as a cane, but in time I was fine. On the beach, I just fell over into the sand. I may have looked drunk, but many people were, so no one much noticed or cared.

Here’s how I described what I was feeling to the Vienna cousins while packing this time in the middle of February 2020:

Hello everyone, I am thinking of you all. I am two weeks away from locking up my Hut for maybe as much as six months. I am trying to get ready, and feel more bird-brained and foggy-headed as I approach lift-off. But really all is OK or manageable, as is my health, and I am sending similar wishes of good luck to you. I did indeed change the date, to come earlier, to say happy birthday to Apu.



Love from Eileen

Final preparations were intense with last-minute whirly-swirliness. I get nervous before any big trip. The entire week or so before, I simultaneously want to say goodbye to everyone in the vicinity, and to be absolutely alone to collect my thoughts, which are flying away like birds from their cages. I try to do both things at once, which short-circuits all thinking, and I succeed at neither. A sleepwalking auto-pilot gets me where I am going, and the whole procedure is eery and uncomfortable. In that sense, I am not a good traveller. If you told me I had to move every night and sleep somewhere new each time, I’d probably cry. I don’t like travelling. I like emigrating. I like getting where I’m going, and then setting up shop.

When I arrive at the other end, that gratitude flows like a mighty river. Sometimes tears do too. Then I set up the new routine.

In past years, those final few weeks were always packed with goodbye dinners with the various expats who were here every winter. We met up in this way for many years. I saw their kids grow from toddlers to teens. There were dinners with the German and Belgian couples, the Spanish and Italian connection, the Italian-Thai couples, various Swiss, miscellaneous musical connections and even a few Anglos. Some of these were large get-togethers, and the sequence unfolded over a week. Not now.

As for the Thais, that needed an extended bike ride around the village, which had to be just before I left – the day before, ideally. That was a separate series of See You Next Years. This time was no different, like with many years preceding.

The exception was Nong restaurant matriarch Ew (“Ee-YOO” in a rising or questioning tone). We had to have a special edition of our usual play. She’d ask how many months I’d be away, and always remembered to the day, and if I came back later than that, she chided me.

She did this every week anyway. She’d count the days I didn’t show up to her place, and shook a finger at me. It was a joke, and yet I didn’t like saying I ate Thai food elsewhere. I could always say I went to my Italian friends, because she would nod, “Ah, friends”. That was loyalty and duty, nothing to do with food. Sometimes I cooked at home. She’d ask how it was, which was my cue to frown with dismay and say it was never as good as hers. This gag ran for years.

In the countdown days, my mood became more panicky and overemotional, coupled with a determination not to let anyone see this, while maintaining a mature, organised, quiet and cool façade. This could be tiring.

On the subject of my garden – or rather, the machete-managed jungle – after many weeks of weeding a strip each day, things were nicely trim. Some of this vegetation will be taller than I am, I thought, when I come back in six months.

The Landlords agreed to put a dog-net at the top of the stairs after I left. Otherwise I hate to think what the result might be. They knew to guard my bike. They were free to use or loan it, but never did. Usually when I returned from half a year away, it was covered with vines, twirled all over the handlebars.

Leftover food from the fridge went to the neighbours or out into the jungle, in the oldest composting system there is. I follow the local lead. Everything grows well outside that kitchen window. Many seeds I have washed down sprout up of their own accord. And yes, there was a year when I had no time and left things in the fridge to deal with six months later. Really, it only happened once.

In a similar vein, I couldn’t reach some parts of the high ceiling with a broom, so some of those cobwebs were where I had found them six months ago. If not six years. Quentin Crisp was right: dust, left alone, after a few years really does not matter.

I really loved this place, almost like you love a person. What if I never saw this place again? My stomach wailed. Yes, someone else will live here someday. Whoever is next can have all the kitchen and bath stuff, balcony things too. My gift, what the heck. Welcome, whoever you are.

The final ceremony was the clunking shut of the padlock. My bags got half bumped and half slid down the steps that were more like a ladder. I had one big bag on wheels and a small backpack. We bumped and slipped through sand and gravel to the rough track to the rough road where it would get heaved into the back of Et’s pickup truck.

I think my journey was a taxi to a boat to the next island, to a taxi to a hotel, to a taxi the next day to the airport, to a city and a taxi to another hotel, back to the airport, then leaving one side of the planet, arriving on the other side, and my brains arriving a week later.





More About the Boat


There could be a narrow, rickety gangplank, with a railing only on one side. Dragging heavy cases over that was challenging. That’s another mark of how long I have been coming here. In those early years, I did my best and was amazed I did not drop things into the water. Nowadays there is always a young member of staff who helps me. One greys in twenty years, and I get the occasional senior perk now. Also, most young people here, if modestly strong and healthy, are helpful and practical in these moments with the grey-haired, far more on average than their Caucasian counterparts, in my experience.

A tip: when going by boat anywhere, only a fool, a newbie or an optimist books their boat on the same day as they need to connect to things like planes or trains. If you do, you are begging for a storm to wipe out your journey. Weather is weather, especially in small boats.

I got to The Big Mango without incident, and it’s striking how different the airport felt. Absolutely everyone was wearing face masks, there were health posters and hand sanitiser everywhere. People do routinely wear masks here in any case to avoid spraying germs around. I was not raised that way, but now I like the idea. The atmosphere in the airport was calm and cool and careful, and nothing like what the media was showing me in Europe.

Luckily, at the big city hotel near the airport, there was no restaurant, so I was forced to do one of my favourite foodie things, which is to stumble around an unknown market where I can read and understand nothing, guess, seek out food I don’t know, eat it and wonder what it was. In my intrepid but limited spoken Thai, sometimes I never found out. Their answers have many syllables and sometimes a shrug with the translation “Thai fish. Thai vegetable. Thai food”. This is fine, I have learned, after many tries.

A sweet mother-and-daughter team gave me a massive, lovely soup of noodles, greens, garlic and fish balls. The walk back to the hotel involved fried bananas and sweet potatoes in a paper cone, a personal favourite. A sweet coconut snack or three was procured for later, and another temptation for the morning, just in case. I love the world of Thai food. The most ordinary cheap food here is a work of art compared to the world of burgers. I was going to miss it.

Back in my hotel room, I repacked completely. All summer clothes, anything useless in the Arctic, went into the deepest reaches of the big bag. I kept near me a full set of maximum-warmth winter gear, for what I correctly assumed would be a chilly aircraft and a downright icy Vienna.

Flight update: Taiwan and Thailand were handling the virus strictly and well, unlike other places. Chinese flights were cancelled, but not us – so far. “Go now if you’re going” was still the message from the Thai government to all non-Thais. I was practising how not to breathe for many hours on board the plane. Then I learned about up-to-date fresh-air systems on certain big new planes. Somewhere, people were thinking ahead.

Cousin Vera wrote – in her native German, which is to say that the translation humour comes courtesy of the internet’s automatic services.

Dear Eileen!



Everything OK? I would be nerve-wracked if I had to prepare myself for such a trip. I admire you!! When exactly do you come? I want to pick you up. We have a few problems to offer.

We haven’t had hot water in the area for one month. Andi [Vera’s partner] takes cold showers, I at Ruth’s [Vera’s daughter] and you can boil water for washing cats or tea.

There was a hospital visit. The oldies were struggling, and the weather plus everyone’s moods were unpredictable.

I hug you again in writing, hopefully soon for real!

No hot water, in freezing conditions? This will be interesting, I thought. Let’s deal with that later.



I boarded the flight, after the airline staff took my temperature and asked some questions about symptoms. The questions that floated through my brain in its half-sleep were things like: What day was it? Who am I? Where is this? What in the world am I doing with my life? My name again?

Later, it appeared that I or someone who almost resembled me arrived on what felt like another planet. It looked very much like Vienna, and someone very much like Vera hugged me and led me by the elbow.

What a lovely dream. I wonder when I will wake up?





MARCH


Nothing Goes to Plan





CHAPTER V Hey Presto, New Hemisphere


March 2020, Week 1, Vienna


A mere few days ago, I was in a sweaty, crude jungle hut, then I woke up to icy, crisp, sophisticated Vienna. As wonderful as that was, it was also just plain weird. My brain was full of cotton. Not much thinking was going on. Words were simply not forming at all, either inside or out, and that’s very unusual for me.

Fortunately, my arrival started with Cousin Vera coming to the airport to steer me. As with my previous visits, I apologised for bringing too much stuff, but she just laughed, grabbed the heavier bag in one hand, shrugged and proceeded with cigarette and lighter in the other hand, ready for the first breath of fresh air to light up.

There’s no point my trying to make any sense, for about a week, after crossing more than a handful of time zones. How people do that and go straight to work, I have no idea. My cousins were forewarned I’d be a zombie but may have been surprised at the extent. I enjoyed my time with all of them, however hazy. Much of it was spent around various kitchen tables. This is usually my favourite location, anywhere.

It was bloody cold.

They were hopeful people, full of thoughtful, appealing ideas for interesting places to go and climb. Yet I could not keep my eyes open. This went on for about a week. There was nothing much happening in my daily diaries. There was nothing much happening in my brain. That week shuffled by in shabby comfy slippers, in a quiet, foggy daze. My excellent tour guides spent that week steering a sleepwalker from bumping into the walls.

I wish I had an assistant. I really do.

That fine week, the mornings were spent chatting over coffee or over the phone. Lunch was always with the oldies, Apu and his (second) wife Agi. Our routine was much the same, but time had marched on. They were weaker, frailer, grumpier. Now, lunch was no longer made by Apu, which was a shame because he was good at it. In his place was a lovely crew of helpers who were warmly appreciated. in between their tolerating the elders’ frustrations and outbursts.

For his birthday, we went to his favourite restaurant, which was refined, elegant and typical of Vienna’s glory days, and typical of him too, at his best.

We enjoyed planning our upcoming long weekend, only a month away. We liked the idea of another party with friends like last year when they launched my book about how I found these long-lost cousins – the Vienna Cousins, I call them now.

Looking forward, we had an eye on Vienna’s Freud Museum, which was closed now but we hoped for a timely reopening. I learned that all Freud’s furniture – The Couch and almost everything else in that famous study and consulting room – was moved to London in 1938. His daughter Anna had been arrested and interrogated by the Gestapo, so he moved the family to Hampstead in Northwest London. Although I lived nearby there for twenty years and always wanted to go, I somehow never got there. Now I wanted to see both.

The Third Man Museum, film and related tour in English was also firmly on the list. I can hear that theme tune now.

Meanwhile, we organised a private screening of The Sound of Music, at a garden party, for a group of neighbours – Austrians who’d never seen it and knew nothing about it. I was surprised to learn that most Austrians know nothing about the film. I thought the globe knew it and had enough of it, as I did. I hadn’t seen it since childhood, but most Americans have seen it multiple times and can sing every word. We learned every damned song at school. There is to this day a whole cult revolving around screenings of this movie. People go to the cinema dressed as various characters. It is, as they say nowadays, A Thing. It’s a big thing. But, only in the USA, I learned.

The real Von Trapps ended up in the USA, after they escaped Nazi-occupied Austria. They were phenomenally well-known by the end of their tours, which lasted until 1957. Again, mostly in the USA and nowhere else.

It was time to spring the Von Trapp musical on some unsuspecting Austrians. We made an event of the screening. Vera and Andi had lawn chairs and blankets, a nice big screen, snacks and wine, surprisingly great weather and all perfectly organised. We were a bit cynical, bracing ourselves for cringing kitsch, but we were completely charmed. It was very high-quality kitsch.

Another highlight of that visit was when Apu and I enjoyed a family-tree breakthrough. It surfaced during a repeat trawl through ancestral photos. This never took long because we don’t have many. There was one beauty: a distinguished older couple, unidentified. He had a big, bushy, perfectly shaped, typically Hungarian-style moustache and the girth and leaned-back posture of a successful, understated, authoritative man. She wore pearls draped over a matronly bosom and looked wise, the quiet type who gave good counsel. Their photograph was framed in a warm gold colour.

Apu asked me to remind him of the names of the many siblings of our mutual great-grandmother, Sarolta. Most had died young, but one had been part of the family business. Over the years, I’d found notarised documents about where he did business with his father-in-law, brother-in-law and others. He had the paper trail of a stockbroking kingpin.

His name was Miksa.

“Miksa!” Apu cried out. “That’s him, in the photo! That’s him!”

Yes, this made sense. Who else could it be? It was not definitive proof (no labels, no text, nothing), but a highly likely deduction, and I believed it. It now seemed silly that for years I pictured them as dark-haired, tall, willowy. No. They were fair, plump and substantial.

Apu asked for a sketch of Miksa’s family. I found enough scraps to construct a mental photo of all our cousins of that generation, about twenty of them, all young when their cousin Jeno went to New York in 1906 to become Eugene (and ultimately my grandfather).

Five of the gang of cousins mentioned above were the offspring of Great-Uncle Miksa and his wife Szidonia (I adore that name) Szende – born Spitzer and redubbed. They had four enterprising daughters, whose trail I had been on for a few years now. After a long gap arrived the only son, Oszkar. That was a pattern this family would repeat a few times.

In my fantasy photo, Miksa and Szidonia’s four girls – Lujza, Gizella (Gizi), Klara and Margit – took up most of the back row. They all married well and profitably, especially Margit, our very own version of Zsa Zsa Gabor (Margit married three times, Zsa Zsa nine). Also on that back row would have been another Margit, Margit Stark, at the tail end of that age group, another style of Margit altogether. Margit Stark remained a spinster, worked as a humble clerk and lived with her mother all her life. She and her mother Roza died within a week of each other, at the very end of the Second World War, in the final week of the Battle of Budapest (Nazis out, Soviets in, Hungarians lost both ways.)

Even before that, by contrast, the four Szende girls mostly all enjoyed a good climb into further prosperity, based on the scraps I managed to find.



The story pieced together so far:

The oldest was Lujza (1884–1937). She married a Jewish lawyer and went into the property business with him. Unusually, on their documents, she was listed as a co-owner rather than the customary “Mr Smith and (nameless) wife”, which, besides being insulting, is an annoying block to research. Even a gravestone marking “Mrs George Smith” tells you nothing about her people and where she’s from, and you simply may not be able to find anything else about her. Lujza and husband Sandor Nagy had two boys: Miklos, who died about aged four, and a boy Tamas, who was born two years after that. I wish we knew more.

Gizi was born only a year later (1885–1944). She was a dance teacher – I saw her ads and her phone listings. She also married a Jewish lawyer, Zoltan Vajda, who left her a widow when she was forty-four. Their son Peter was a locksmith, according to a Budapest 1941 census. His whereabouts after that are unknown. Eventually, later, I learned she died in 1944. Her grave was so overgrown nothing could be seen.

Klara (1888–1963) married a Jewish businessman, Istvan Revesz, had two children and was divorced when the kids were still young. The kids may or may not have survived the Second World War. Two people with their description were dragged away to the death camps but survived and crawled back again, but I’m not 100 per cent sure this was really them.

Margit was the youngest of the girls (1890–1963 or later, another unknown). She married three times, our Zsa Zsa. First, there was Erno Kurzweil, the glass factory owner (Jewish) whom she divorced; then a mystery man who left her a widow; then in 1936, right before the Second World War, she changed gear and married a Catholic, a military man, Lt General Oszkar Maliczki, She converted to Catholicism shortly – very shortly, in fact; a matter of weeks – before the wedding. Perhaps she had the strategic mind of an army general too, in her own way. The general died in 1957, far from Budapest where she was living, and I don’t know if it’s worth dwelling on that. She lived long enough to bury her older sister Klara. I found no other clues as to her whereabouts after that.

After Margit’s birth came a gap of six years. Then came a surprise.

Welcome Oszkar (1896–1944). He became an office worker. At one point, he changed his religion – on paper, anyway – to Calvinism. He married a divorcee, Julianna Erzsebet Maria Karolyi, and I was on her trail to learn more.



This was all I knew so far, which gave some delicious glimpses. So it was with a pang that I realised, just as this got interesting, that information had begun to run dry. I suspected there wasn’t much to find in Budapest; I didn’t expect to be there very long anyway.

The Covid situation was mushrooming and some borders were closing, but we all reasoned it might be over in a month or two. No need to get ahead of oneself.

One thing was sure. If travel was soon to be restricted, I’d be glad to leave Vienna for Budapest. I didn’t want to risk crowding my cousins in their nice, albeit small, flat for weeks on end. Their cat Logo would never share his room for that long. He’d piss on everything in protest. He’s done it before.

So, as planned, on a Friday in early March, I decamped via the usual train from Vienna to Budapest, a popular line and comfortingly familiar. I felt giddy and overexcited, like a teen on a date. I didn’t even care that I was not on one of the sleek Austrian trains with the surprisingly nice buffet. No, it was the shabby, shaky old Hungarian train with no food at all, nothing but the stink of homemade salami sandwiches in other people’s paper bags. I was smiling, despite everything.





CHAPTER VI Visiting Buddies


March 2020, Week 2, Budapest


I nearly wept as we approached Keleti station, as if I were seeing an old pal, a scruffy but cool old dear friend. Even the usual local grime and petty grifters were a welcome sight, just for being familiar.

I dragged my oversized suitcase to the place in district VII where I’d stayed, on and off, over the last few years. The first time I’d planned a month but ended up staying five. Each year it happened again. Then all that research got published in a book, with some sweet launch parties in 2019. So this time, it would be just a quick hello. No more than a month or two. That was the plan.

Budapest’s district VII is central, touristy, noisy, party-prone; near ratty Blaha Lujza square, home to many homeless people and also to cheap hotels and serviced flats or “apart-hotels” where you can rent a flat (with a kitchen – essential!) by the day, week or month. I was attracted to the back-up services like cleaners, laundry, English speakers in a 24/7 reception. The clerks even insisted that I could phone them at 3am to take me to a hospital, if needed. When a senior travels alone, this counts for a lot. This is reassuring gold-dust.

This year, the staff were all new and unfamiliar to me and perhaps also to this line of work. They had no idea I was a special, lovely, friendly, tidy, non-troublesome, never annoying, reasonable, quiet yet amusing regular who was worth some welcoming chit-chat. There was none of that, not a shred. They nicely took my money and gave me a key, and I took my humility upstairs.

It was the same room as ever. The month-long plan included straggler research questions in the genealogy stakes to pursue, friends to see, menus to peruse. Limited time imbued matters with a buzzing sort of urgency, to dive in and enjoy as much as possible – archives, pastries, everybody.



I set up camp like before. Kitchen first: it took a few trips with a rolling suitcase plus rucksack:

First round: basics (salt, pepper, coffee), and heavies (oil, tins, drinks).

Second round: fresh stuff, frozen, more heavies.

Third round: double portions of tonight’s dinner and tomorrow’s breakfast. Something sweet – two of them, maybe three.

A few rounds later, a camping-style canteen was established. I’d stored small cases with generous friends, and now was the time to go retrieve them, now that we’d all forgotten what was in them. It turned out that Kata had books and papers, Mr C and Mr C had kitchen things and winter clothes. It was sweet to see pals again. We had plans.

Budapest HAFH (Home Away From Home) was up like a tent. Lists were on the walls, and soon it would be one big notice board. The finishing touches went into a corner with ancestral memorabilia, next to the library and study area. There were family photos, postcards of the bridges being built (symbolic as well as historic), and Granddad’s old cigarette case with the initials I shared with him. It may have come from Budapest originally. I keep photos in there, a dried oak leaf from Dad’s cemetery, and some ancient, fossilised shark’s teeth, for perspective. It was one of my precious belongings, since we were both EKs.

Now we shared it with another EK. It turns out that our cousin Oszkar’s wife was born Julianna but always used Erzsebet Karolyi. That made three EKs, with me and Granddad, as a Magic Three or some kind of genealogical coven.

I welcomed her especially when I learned more. She was intriguing. She was already a divorcee when she divorced our Oszkar, within weeks married her third husband, after which she ran for Parliament on a liberal ticket in Nazi times.

From our nice Jewish cousin Oszkar’s point of view, she certainly had some progressive views: for someone documented as Catholic, she obviously had no fear of divorce proceedings or anything dictatorial – be it religious, political or spousal.



I had a hot little wish list. It was an advantage to be here at the start of March, before all the tourists who usually flood in. For one thing, there was the delightful matter of choosing where to go on March 15, Free Museum Day, and that’s not its real name. Hungarian Revolution and Independence Day is a national holiday celebrating the revolt against the Habsburg Empire in 1848 (failed but heroic). There would be all the usual parades, picnics and family-friendly, entertaining and gluttonous events, plus free museums. It was the right day to choose an expensive one.

Best of all was planning to visit Grandma’s village. This would be with the help of Karesz, tour guide and genealogist. I could see where she was from, learn more about it, maybe add some information to the tree. Maybe we’d get very lucky and find living cousins, but that would be astounding good luck and very much against the odds.

Meanwhile, back at Budapest base camp, I got to know the latest staff at what I’ll call Grey Apartments. I saw who was quick or not, on time or not, friendly or not, knew what a printer was or not, and so on. It wasn’t quite the same as before.

Outside, there was one familiar face: the stout lady drunk who often panhandled nearby. I used to help her out with small change, once a day only, that was the rule. It became a routine, a lunch allowance. If she accidentally held out her cup to me a second time in one day, on recognising me, she would laugh, apologise and take it back. We had an understanding, and maybe twenty words in common, but good communications.

This year when she saw me, she smiled and didn’t even hold out the cup. She chatted, in a friendly way, in Hungarian, knowing full well I didn’t get any of it, but she conveyed, “Welcome back. Nice to see you, I hope you’re well.” I mimed the same in return. Then I gave our usual signal that I had no change now, but would deliver later. She got it. It was a very well-rehearsed sign language.

Other drunks got aggressive but never her. She was a steady beer tippler, possibly constantly, but she was even-tempered, at worst a bit stumbly or slurred of speech. She was quiet-spoken, and better behaved than most people. This struck me as ironic, every damned day.





Monday


I trotted down to the Family Research Centre, near the Great Synagogue. Archivist and researcher Szandra was looking well, as were her colleagues, who did not speak English as well as she did – and my Hungarian was still limited – but we all waved cheerily.

I had another trawl through the 1945 Remnants book, which listed survivors of the Second World War, but found no one who wished to be found, or could be found. We gossiped a bit and agreed to meet next week when she’d help unearth my granddad’s birth certificate and arrange a verified copy for me. And, finally, we’d have lunch too, which we kept meaning to do, for a real proper gossip and not just work-talk.

That did not happen. Nor did the document. Covid and other things intervened.

The office was in the middle of memos and confusion from their superiors about whether or not the new virus meant cutting down opening hours or even shutting for a while. She would let me know.





Tuesday


This evening saw the launch of Dr Paul Marer’s book I Participated in Wallenberg’s Rescue Operation, the story of Marianne Vaney, the last surviving member of Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg’s team that saved so many lives in Nazi-occupied Hungary. It’s a concise double biography – of the great hero and a supposedly ordinary woman doing extraordinary work.





Wednesday


How fine to be back at the Budapest City Archives. A few staff members even recognised me. I put in a stack of requests, some of which the new rules forbid. This was disappointing since they were about a court case, and I like those. But research and access laws were stricter now. They released fewer documents than they used to. I tried anyway, on the trail of a couple of alleged embezzlements, a divorce, some business dealings, something military and a couple of auctions. Gossip was gossip. I had to try.





Thursday


Karesz drove me to several cemeteries, but we didn’t find out much. There was the big Jewish cemetery, the large public one and maybe another but by then, the picture blurred and I needed food and water.

However, one story emerged, that of Dr Mor Devai (1841–1923), born Moritz Deutsch, who was the Budapest city coroner for many years. We learned that he lost his only child, a son named Zoltan, who died aged eleven in 1893. The boy’s mother was Katarina Fischer, Mor’s first wife, who died only a couple of years later, age thirty-eight.

A heartfelt prayer was on the stone, which added even more strange poignance to the grave of the coroner’s little boy.

About seven years after he was widowed, he married a second time, aged sixty-one. He continued working until he was seventy, publishing many articles along the way and finally retiring in 1911. But in 1914, he was reinstated as a doctor to serve in the First World War. He lived for forty years on Akademia street, near the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.

His second wife, Regina Freisinger, died aged eighty-one, in 1922. Mor died the following year. They are both buried with the little boy, but I could not find where the boy’s mother was buried.

That’s what we knew of Dr Devai, mournful coroner who buried his only child.





Friday


I visited the Library of the Hungarian Parliament, which I wasn’t keen to approach alone. There was extra strict security at a series of checkpoints, but all reasonable. Soon I was in and shepherded to a computer where, from memory, I entered all the same information I’d already provided online. It was either a convoluted system or a memory test, or I don’t know what.

I was allowed into the big hall and was stunned by its splendour, built on a magnificent scale in beautifully carved dark wood. From the centre of the ground floor, you faced a cliff of books, with staircases around the edges of the vast cavern.

No one spoke English. This ran contrary to many people telling me, “Just go. How can they not have English speakers?” They didn’t, or rather, they didn’t have anyone that day. Maybe their one English speaker was at home, or at lunch. A nice lady gave me the library’s email address. I was not optimistic.

The Parliamentary enquiry was about Erzsebet Karolyi. This lady married our cousin Oszkar Szende, ditched him and remarried quickly, then ran for MP in 1939 on a liberal ticket. This was bold when the fascist-style Nazi-followers, the Arrow Cross Party, was way in the lead. There were about a dozen men who ran with her. I sensed gutsiness in Erzsebet and liked her already. She was a new entry in our family’s Feisty Female Folder.

She and cousin Oszkar divorced after eleven years of marriage. I wondered how these two had got together. Obviously, she had bold courage. Was he the clichéd baby of his brood, passive and soft, as useless speculation suggested? We’ll never know, but I sensed a chalk-and-cheese situation.

In his childhood home were a mother and four older doting sisters, no brothers and a dad always at work. When Oszkar was thirty-one, his mother died. Two years later, his father died.

The following year, he married Erzsebet Karolyi. He’d already forsaken his family’s Judaism for Calvinism, at least on paper. On paper, she was Catholic but not really; she was already divorced, and would divorce Oszkar too.

Surprisingly, lots of Kardos women divorced over a hundred years ago. Not so surprisingly, there were lots of lawyers in the family, too.

In 1939, Erzsebet’s name was posted in a list of parliamentary candidates to represent Hungary’s Civic Freedom Party. Formed in 1921, they were later known successively as the National Liberal Party, National Freedom Party, Unified Liberal Democratic Party and Liberal and Democratic Opposition. That year, they won five seats but she did not win hers.

In 1944, the Civic Freedom Party was dissolved by the Communist Party. In 1945, it was re-formed under yet another name, the Civic Democratic Party.

She and Oszkar divorced in 1942, on 27 November. She remarried the following month. She and Hubby Three must have been waiting like a coiled spring.

Two years later, in 1944, divorced Oszkar died of heart failure, aged forty-seven. It was “reported by the widow of Zoltán Vajda”, his older sister Gizi, the dance teacher with the locksmith son.

Yes, cousin Oszkar died too young.

I admired Erzsebet – running for MP on a liberal ticket when Nazi sympathisers were in the lead? Getting married three times despite Catholic restrictions? And all before 1950? She showed damned good spark, I say.

She died in 1962, aged fifty-four. Her death record listed her as wife of Gyula Diacsek, her third husband. This document listed her occupation as assistant, not saying what kind. But it did not call her a housewife, like when she ran for MP twenty years earlier.

They were living in district II, but she died of breast cancer in hospital in district X. Gyula survived her.





Fantasy Tea-time with Girl Cousins


I wondered about the younger, twice-divorced, political Erzsebet in post-war Budapest. A few of her cousins and contemporaries had survived as well, and I imagined moments where they clung to each other.

Maybe they met at Cousin Jolan’s place. Jolan was the type to hold court – a networker, survivor, leader, literary expert, trained classical pianist and teacher, highly cultured and once or twice accused of being an artistic snob.

Cousin Olga, though, ran a sort of lunch restaurant in her apartment, which would have been a more likely place for the cousins to gather. She also enjoyed three husbands – a lawyer, a doctor and finally a lawyer again. She was a warm, bubbly type, according to Apu.

If cousin Angyalka (who married artist Jozsef Suto) had survived the war, she’d have been there with Jolan, no doubt. Jolan witnessed her wedding. Jolan witnessed Olga’s divorce. Jolan witnessed plenty. These cousins were all in their thirties or forties, mostly divorced, and one can assume there were lively talks over meals and overflowing ashtrays.

Jolan the cool musician, Olga the warm foodie, bold political Erzsebet, Angyalka who married the painter. What about the Szende girls? Lujza died before the war and Gizi during it, but divorced Klara was still around. Margit was on husband number three, the General, but I saw our Zsa Zsa with a more hoity-toity social set, if she could manage it.

I wish I could have heard the stories of these women over tea, wine, anything. I wish I could have breathed the same oxygen.

Then I discovered why Erzsebet may not have been lunching with the girls. She may have been busy with her little daughter, Anna Maria, born in 1943, whom I’d just discovered. What a scary time in Hungary to be bringing a child into the world.

About Anna Maria, it’s sad to say that the first thing I learned was from her death record. “Anna Maria Diacsek, born 18 October 1943, Budapest VII, to Diacsek Gyula & Karolyi Erzsebet. Died age 24, 26 March 1967. Unmarried. Occupation: tailor. Address: Budapest I, Alkotas street 18 (with her parents, where they lived for many years to follow). Hospital report, 30 March: cause of death – acute drug poisoning: drug overdose.”

That was the end of their line, to my knowledge. Poor Gyula had to bury his wife, and then his daughter. I don’t know if there was anyone else in the picture or whether that left him alone.



As for Budapest in general, fortunately, for me it had all the same magic as before, which has been charming people for centuries. The city was an elegant backdrop for the contemporary pleasure of re-canvassing favourite eateries in a casual competition for best hummus, best vegan, best Hungarian, best flodni cake, best goulash, and so on. This was a blissful and indulgent pastime.

Naturally also, I went to every bookshop with anything in English. I had to be selective. When you live out of a suitcase, you cannot collect a load of books – well, you can, but only with the consent of nearby, weak, book-adoring pals who will store them for you. I’ve experienced this from both sides – bookends, you might say. Not everything was in a digital format, and I had to plead my case for the housing and survival of key paperbacks. I had no plan, or space, but plenty of love and intention. Something would come up.

I was cheered on by the sight of a guy coming toward me on the pavement who almost bumped into me, reading as he walked, not noticing anyone or anything else. He swerved at the last millimetre, never saw me. He was not a youth on a phone. He was a wrinkly oldster with a stack of paperback books, the top one open and already captivating him, bless him. I felt he would get home safely. He deserved to.

It was a rich and full week. As of Friday, there was still no official word on new travel restrictions. We’d need to wait until Monday. Then we would either go to Grandma’s neck of the woods, or postpone it a little.

Just a little.





CHAPTER VII Plan B


Monday, 16 March 2020


Phase one of the “lockdown” was called in Hungary on this day. We had no idea how we’d come to hate this word, in time. Chaos and confusion reigned here and over most of the world. Among the debates, arguments and indecision, it was a very long Monday for all. In my case, it began before sun up, packing for the Grandma trip I knew might not happen. Then the news was official: most travel was banned for at least a week. We did not cancel but postponed. Unfortunately, Karesz suddenly lost all his tour guiding work for a while, with no flights coming in. I’d stay, so our gig could wait. It might be a few months.

A lot can change in one weekend. The world felt changed fundamentally on what was later known as That Fateful Monday.

Cousin Vera wrote from Vienna:



The announcements have been rolling over us for four days. Wednesday the university closed, Thursday schools, museums, all events over 100 people, Friday most shops closed, travel warning for the whole world! Our Chancellor tonight: nobody should be on the street unless it is absolutely necessary.

Apu and Agi are lucky, Dorina [their home helper] lives in Vienna, so she has no entry problem, unlike 1,000 nurses who normally provide 24-hour care for 14 days, are then relieved and go home to Slovakia or the Czech Republic and are no longer allowed to enter.

I hardly see Ruth and Nuri anymore [her daughter and grandson]. Today we saw each other for a walk outdoors and I am very unsure if I can continue. A queasy feeling.

If everything goes according to plan, it will loosen up in 2 weeks, but nobody really believes that now. But we’re all healthy.



Love from Vera



Elsewhere, everyone was arguing – about everything. As for The Virus, one pattern seemed clear: those who were strict, and thought of each other, were suffering less, on average – physically and psychologically. This was not a coincidence. But I stopped arguing and just hid, for everyone’s sake.

All archives and libraries were suddenly closed. All research was delayed. In the meantime, I was alone in a studio flat all day. I lived like that anyway, and was mostly on the computer. But there were some changes to my routine.

After-work walks became problematic. It was more challenging to dodge the drunks. Their new game was steering straight toward people who were clearly trying to avoid them. I was jokingly advised to cough at these clowns, or near them. I love joking but that’s over the line, even if I had the nerve. What if I were a carrier?

I rescheduled walks for after dinner but before bars shut.

In general, some people set up helpful networks, while others bragged that they’d hogged all the toilet rolls at the supermarket. One saw people’s true colours. That’s when people started talking about culls, selection of the fittest, a natural pecking order.

Meanwhile, I was getting daily emails from the UK Foreign Office telling me to come home. Yes, I was a citizen there, but home? At the moment, I had nowhere to go, and hotels were not taking people anyway at this point. By now, UK Covid and death numbers were so much worse than mainland Europe, it was not an inviting time to visit.

It’s a disturbing feeling to make an important decision without enough information. Everything felt like flying blind. There would be no happy cartoon ending, where the character is pushed out of the plane without a parachute, lands on a tent and breaks into the circus profession. We were only at the getting pushed-out phase, with no guarantee of any safety net.

Every scientist, doctor and epidemiologist in the world was telling me to stay put. I instinctively felt like staying put. I actually had a place to stay put. And I’d just got here! So, I stayed put. After all, it was only temporary, wasn’t it? I’d get to the UK – I mean to Scotland – as soon as this was over. Surely it was only a matter of weeks at most?

If I got sick, there was that national treasure, the British National Health Service (NHS), which had served me well for decades. Also, in Budapest, I had one year left in the EU healthcare-exchange scheme. I was covered. I did not want to fly just then. Eastern Europe had shut their borders, but the UK was as open as ever. Nothing was regulated, and hospitals were soon full to heaving and obviously desperate.

My friends Mr C and Mr C invited me to a sort of last-chance dinner. We hesitated to hug.

“We’re not supposed to.”

“It’s our last one for a while.”

We made it quick.



Arrivals in Budapest airport met a mangled kerfuffle about who could enter and who could not. Some people were detained without explanation. Others were let in when, strictly speaking, they should not have been. There were allegations of racism and political motives in sending some people away. It did seem random, capricious and disorganised, but when policies changed every week, what did one expect? That was the new policy: check in every Monday, when we will change the policy.

There was no guarantee a non-citizen like myself, even with my residency card, would be allowed back in. There were cases of this. Chaos exploded on people and stranded them in a moment, with a weekend bag and no way to get home. That clinched it. I wasn’t going anywhere. I embraced March’s Plan B. I extended my stay and hunkered down right then and there when everyone around me was fleeing.

Then it hit me like a gong. I was grateful I’d put into action February’s Plan B! Sometimes Plan B is the better option! If I’d tried to fly to Europe as planned, later this month, I’d never have got in. They’d have let me out of Thailand, but would anyone have let me in? Would I have become one of those airport moles with nowhere to go?

No. Friends noted there were worse places to shelter than Budapest and I agreed. If one must be stranded, let it be near strudel. I was feeling lucky.





Spring Equinox, 21 March 2020


I was not in the mood to do the apocalyptic vision thing. But plague days were ahead, more illness and funerals than usual, then political fascism pretending to help, but, in truth, it was mere power-grabbing and profiteering. Culls and challenges and grief were to come.

Happy Spring.

I did not want to go out for fear of accidentally spreading or inhaling doom, but I needed groceries. Delivery slots were only available months away, if at all. I went in the mornings, now reserved for oldies only, from nine until noon. At 11.45am, those waiting outside had such hateful scowls, I never again went at that time. The temptation to kick me to the ground was visible on some faces in that crowd. I offered someone my cart, and she refused, looking as if she wanted to spit at me. It was war. Dogs were eating dogs, or looking like they wanted to.

It was a week of panic and confusion for many people, facing something that may blight the century and maybe this species. Others noted that perhaps a good cull of our species was exactly what the planet needed. I found difficulty arguing against that. But I didn’t want to do the choosing, or the spraying about of lack of choice.





Monday, 23 March 2020


Today the lockdown got heavier. The challenge was to stay indoors for two weeks at a time. In terms of getting food, the best I could do was one week. The deep truth was that I enjoyed the challenge of seeing how little I could leave my room.

Then, just for tragi-comedy value, and as an ironic, karma-laden prank from The Beyond, as cold weather turned snowy, the zipper broke on my only winter jacket. It was donated to me by Cousin Vera, rescuing me from desperation last year. As today was even snowier, I needed it badly to go get food. I held the jacket closed with a contrasting scarf as a belt, and took the first step on the inevitable road toward becoming a bag-lady. Or at least adopting her costume. Perhaps it was not the very first step. I may have shuffled in that direction before, certainly in terms of outer style.

Meanwhile, on the streets some people kept a respectful distance. Others glared and did not. Some didn’t know, some forgot, some didn’t believe it, some didn’t care and some came right at you with rebellious anger.

A sign at the supermarket asked us to not buy more than ten of any one product. At the checkout, the guy ahead of me had a huge cart piled high like an alpine mountain range. He had exactly nine of everything. He had a huge sturdy rucksack and two large suitcases in each hand. He looked dressed to live in the woods or a bunker, perhaps with a ravenous young family or some other group to feed. He looked both scared and scary, panicky but smart as well, in a vaguely twisted way.

On the way home, I weakened and bought a cheap, nasty, infamously over-salted but fragrant roast chicken, even though the place and the chicken were awful, but the communal panic for survival drove me back to eating flesh, which I hoped would subside.

At least my flat came with a TV. Most of the channels were in languages I did not understand, and some I could not even recognise. In English, there were three: CNN, BBC, Al-Jazeera. I was surprised how far to the right the BBC sometimes went, and how far to the left CNN sometimes went. In the middle was Al-Jazeera, which did wider international coverage too. Comparing them became a game, three-way propaganda tennis.

On the internet was a tidal wave of conflicting advice from dubious, if any, sources. Frontrunners: 5G internet causes the virus to spread. Do not drink bleach, but a combination of salt water and oregano. Covid-19 was a bioweapon, but not an effective one – it should have been more deadly and quick. This was considered poor design.

To the daily routine was added much boiling and lathering of everything. Food shopping meant suiting up like an astronaut, sprinting there and back, stripping all packing, scrubbing the rest, throwing all clothes in the laundry, washing everything I went near, scrubbing all surfaces, floors and doorknobs, then washing myself thoroughly from hair to toenails.

Someday we will talk about The Before Time.



I got used to the changes, bit by bit. It was weirdly exhausting, all the new ideas, all the new fears to battle down. But I felt a bit lighter today, having actually functioned a little. I dispatched a few tasks that had been hanging over me for a while. I clarified and simplified my medical instructions, and even got them translated into Hungarian. I was bureaucratically ready to die, if nothing else.

Best of all, I initiated a daily check-in group, like my mom had. I was now a true senior who called out each day, “Still alive!” It was surprisingly hard to ask for this, but a group readily agreed, bless them. This safety net was very reassuring. When one lives alone, in a foreign land especially, this has to be constructed from friends and neighbours, or Chosen Family, which is a real phrase in German.

Ironically, the ones quickest to notice that you haven’t answered will raise the alarm soonest, even from across the world. So, though it sounded crazy, it needed a combination of local and international talent. Thank you, team. One needed one’s mop-up team in an emergency, but I wished to cause minimum fuss. I wanted to be rather British about it all, really.

Everyday life went on much as before, in my case, luckily. These days, online work was the best thing available, while I watched in horror as many lost their jobs. My heart also went out to those on what are now routinely called the front lines – in health care, in supermarkets, on delivery bikes. They do not get to hide, like I do.

I happened to like hiding, so this was a convenient, if perverted, excuse





CHAPTER VIII Plan C


March 2020, Week 4, Budapest


Budapest was a ghost town and spying was dull. Very few people were out on the streets, only the silently gliding cyclists, criss-crossing the city to bring people meals.

Letter from Vera:

Corona messes everything up. Nowhere to find the usual free newspaper on the street. Life feels strange.

Do you know Moshe Feldenkrais? The coach of Ben Gurion, still able to do a headstand at the age of 80. He was a chemist and dealt with neurological processes. The basis of his pain therapy is to try to change the usual process when moving. For example, if I cross my arms, my right hand is automatically under my left arm. It is not so easy for me to do it the other way round. And the situation reminds me of that now.

Maybe these many small changes in everyday life will become pain therapy for society?



See you soon, in love, Vera!

If the virus takes away Vera’s Sunday newspapers, we may have a real revolution.





Friday, 27 March 2020


The experimental lockdown in Hungary was being extended and deepened, and the prime minister blamed the opposition. His now dictatorial powers have been granted indefinitely. It looked like a power grab for life. No leader wants such a virus on his watch, but many have been making the most of it.



From Vera came this:

Hello dear Eileen!



It is difficult for me today to write something beautiful and constructive. The government says we are expected to peak in mid-April to mid-May. Then the chance to get infected is quite decent. It is increasingly said that high-risk patients should no longer go out.

Today I actually only smoked 2 cigarettes, a sensation for me. Maybe that’s why I’m in a bad mood.

The apartment is getting tidier. Andi gets up at 6 and cleans and cleans with enormous energy. I’m happy and I’m trying to keep up.

We eat warm lunch together, an almost ancient tradition comes to life again. Sometimes we sing, Andi plays the flute or accordion. He even reads, I don’t, but I’m whining again.

Eileen – I wish you all the best, everything good and beautiful! And I very much hope that we can celebrate and celebrate together and celebrate again and again.

I replied that I was just dealing with one day at a time, sometimes just one hour. The realisation that the whole thing was so global hit me harder than I expected. Thinking of a whole week was a challenge. Focusing on anything properly was a challenge. But music was a very good antidote to any challenge! I shut the curtains and danced up a sweat. Almost as energetic as running away from drunk people pursuing me.

I wrote back, in the spirit of counting one’s blessings, that “a few years ago I did not know you exist. Now your whole branch is a part of my life. That’s still amazing to me. It’s a very good addition.” Thanks to modern technology, we had a multi-way conversation. They sang Happy Birthday. I wrote online messages of thanks to others who remembered. It was touching.

I was alone and I was not alone at all.

We all agreed: there was something different about this epidemic, even apart from the media hysteria shaping things for the worse. We all felt human history making a large turn. I now felt the meaning of the phrase “a sea change”. This was what was rocking my knees, making it hard to simply hold my ground. It was later I saw that I was fuzzy-brained with shock, as many people were, for longer than they wanted – for longer than they knew. It was a vast and deep communal shock, felt throughout the species.



It was soon obvious that quarantine was one thing and “self-isolating” was quite another. Mixed reviews would be putting it mildly. Half measures would prove useless, over time. While people argued, hospitals filled to overflowing. On the other hand, Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore and New Zealand were hailed as having the lowest number of cases per head of population. I studied their methods, but knew things could change. I did a heck of a lot of reading about pandemics, theories on masks or other routines, and which nations had which rules. That was the homework of the moment.

On the ground, one saw basic values being opposed, more bluntly than I’d ever heard before. Some people thought it was obvious to minimise suffering and death. Some wanted to avoid death themselves but didn’t care if others fell victim. Some advised me to be ready to meet my maker, or let Mother Nature take her course, as long as they didn’t have to change their leisure activities.

I decided it was time to re-read Albert Camus’s book The Plague, which long ago I had thought was one of the greatest novels ever written, both moving and inspiring. It still is. Our story was like his but on a bigger scale, with less wisdom but fewer rats. Also, to add insult to injury, ours was not in a beautiful literary style suggestive of a mythological parable, but rather more like a second-rate cheap cartoon.



Least favourite shocks: I hated the idea I might never see Mr and Mrs Landlord again. In truth, that will be a deep grief, whenever it does happen. I did not give up hope, but it was best to forget it for the next little while. I heard from another neighbour that the atmosphere over there was dire, especially for the Burmese who were trapped in Thailand, now unemployed. Some lost housing and meals tied to their job. Welfare kitchens sprang up, got criticised by officials, and went underground, run by smart women and good cooks I’d met and trusted. I sent money.





Sunday, 29 March 2020


There was an ominous knock at the door. No one ever knocked whom I did not expect. This was the extremely unexpected receptionist, telling me that because most guests were leaving (fleeing like mad, en masse, more like), the hotel was shutting their office the next day.

The next day!? I panicked. Where will I go? How will I find a new place in one day? I could stay, he reassured me, clearly incredulous that I wanted to stay. But, he insisted, I could stay. There would be very few souls in that huge stony place, but water and electricity would flow, because the owners lived there too. All other services now stopped and the rent dropped accordingly. No cleaners, no office hours, but you could ring for an appointment to procure fresh towels and elusive loo roll, top hoarded item in the city after alcohol.

The building was eerily empty, but not for long. Within a few weeks, the place filled with Romany families who strung laundry and left kiddie bikes everywhere. The security guy at the downstairs office was long gone, and the front door, unlike before, perpetually open. It was now an open public park with absolutely no one in charge.

The clocks went back an hour, as they do each year, and nothing could possibly seem more stupid and useless as that ridiculous exercise. But there we were.

I was in one room most of the time. I dreamed of going to Scotland because I couldn’t go. I was hooked into the internet for more hours than could possibly be healthy, but searched for a potential new home – back where I never wanted to leave. I was driven away after the recession of 2008, when I lost my job, and then I lost six years of my pension. I sold or stored everything and fled to a cheap bungalow in a “less developed” nation. I seriously question that term, but it was indeed massively cheaper to live in a crude jungle hut in rural Thailand, even factoring in the airfare.

In Brexit-land, property prices were going up and up. A modest room in a shared house in an obscure location was hard to find and not cheap. I needed to go search in person. This would take time, persistence and pals keeping their ears open on the grassroots network. I missed my base. I really missed my village. I loved it there. And so, where there’s love, one persists. It just needed time. My radar was pointed in that direction, and would remain tuned in.

Meanwhile, for the hell of it, I also looked in Budapest, where things were cheaper than the UK but had a different flavour of snags. There were many accounts of landlords who spoke no English, returned no deposits, had no contracts and repaired no problems. Also, there were as many awful tenants who were cheats, thieves, vandals and runaways. The whole scene looked tetchy and untrusting. It was lucky I was not looking for real.

There also remained the theoretical possibility of wanting to phone for a doctor at 3am. I had very little hope of anything like that. The one exception in my lifetime was Mrs Landlord back in Thailand. She had a third-grade education but more sense than most. She’s taken me to the doctor herself, more than once, bless her. I’ve yelled “Snake!” and been rescued by her with nothing more than a sarong and a knife on a long bamboo pole. I’d trust her with my life. Her ethos and her ways seemed very far away now. Trust is a rare bird.

Meanwhile, Thailand had shut their doors. There was no telling when I could go back. It did not look like soon, not at all.

From my letter to Apu:

Since you ask, I do nothing for Pesach, although I like rye matzoh but that local shop is shut. I do nothing for Easter too, usually, just resting at home.

This year put an odd spin on “resting at home”. The upcoming Easter-Passover weekend was a four-day affair, the weather was predicted to be mild and dry, and thousands would be out there opposing all instructions and advice, spreading germs galore. I planned way ahead and stocked up on groceries as if for a bunker under siege. This was how freedom worked, in this case – i.e., only for some, the selfish and aggressive. I’d stay in and hide for four days, but was lucky to have a sunny balcony.

That weekend went as predicted. Thousands went out, hundreds got sick and gave it to thousands more in the weeks that followed. Suffering and death skyrocketed. I wish I knew how many cases were mild at home and how many needed hospitalisation. The knee-jerk “We’re all going to die” scream was starting to hurt my ears and not really make sense. On the other hand, I was old and weak so maybe I should simply be quiet and hide. I’m lucky to be three-quarters hermit by nature anyway. Not everyone would find this easy – far from it. I shuddered when I thought of the inevitable increase in domestic abuse. I shuddered and blessed the lock on my door.

Overall, we all saw the potential scale of the pandemic. Talk was no longer of weeks but months. It was time to plot an escape, however childish or imaginary. Anything would do.





APRIL


Escape!





CHAPTER IX Spying


April 2020, Week 1, Budapest


I wrote stunningly little in April. Generally, the themes were denial, distraction and escape. Many of us still felt shocked, and attempting everyday tasks was like swimming through molasses. We got fed, zombie-walked through chores and employment, and obviously sought out alternative worlds.

My new hobby was amateur espionage and photography. Viewed from five floors up, people took on odd shapes when passing directly underneath. A fat person looked like a big ball with a small ball on top. A long fat dog appeared as a rectangle with flailing corners. And so on. It continued to amaze me how seldom people looked up. One guy did, however, and he really glared.

This espionage was not political, just neighbourly. Our main character we’ll call Mr Gardener, since he was often on his balcony tending plants. He lived opposite, a few floors down and to the right. I’ve seen this guy regularly for the last four years, from this window. He’s either a strong eighty or a worn-out seventy, a bit stooped over. Last year, he lovingly repainted the wrought-iron railings. This balcony is in good company. Budapest boasts a glorious array of uniquely hand-crafted wrought-iron gates, rails and balconies, some taken to a truly artistic level.

Mr Gardener never looked up. He either watched people in the street, or stared into space with the occasional snooze. I’ll bet he never noticed me. I spent hours watching him. During the cold months, he disappeared, but now, I hoped, he might emerge from hibernation. Then one almost warmish afternoon, a cushion appeared on his chair. I awaited further activity.

Next our plot thickened, with a new character.

Mr Gardener’s balcony door was opened by a woman who wandered into the morning sunshine in a tattered, off-white towelling robe, clutching a scruffy coffee mug. She was curvaceously, voluptuously fat and bleary-eyed with morning hair – hair so black it must be dyed, piled on her head in several heaps. I could not see if she might be a wife, daughter, granddaughter, visitor, housekeeper or whatever else. She certainly seemed at home. Her slippers were cute, flowered, shabby. I nicknamed her Gorgeous Fatty.

One day, I spotted her emerging from the front door and walking down the street. She wore a black, off-the-shoulder leotard, tight black leggings, bright white trainers and plenty of jiggle. Pulling a bright red tartan shopping cart, she had a sturdy gait suggesting a combination of sexy sashay and the message Do Not Get In My Way.

My favourite scene was one morning during her coffee time in the towelling robe. Right next door, a skinny young hipster emerged with her coffee too. She was wearing a groovy kimono awash with pastels, and carrying a powder blue, extra-large coffee cup and saucer with matching rainbow trim. All colours matched – kimono, coffee cup, aura. She placed it on the ledge and began photographing it. (The cup, not the aura).

Gorgeous stared like she’d never seen anything so stupid. She stood at close range, on the very next balcony, directly facing the photographer, who noticed nothing but a close-up of pretty crockery. It was a snapshot of this city, in this decade.

There were regulars. There was The Pink Lady, who had white hair, wore pink and must have been a hundred years old. She watched the street but didn’t seem to see me.

There was Melancholy Builder, who took cigarette breaks at his window. He had a heavy, husky build and a dark look which said he had no woman and dreamed of more than hard work all his life.

There were one-off moments, like these two early Sunday morning scenes, each a father-and-son team.

A dad and a small boy returned from jogging. Dad looked like he wanted to die, leaned against the door, hung his head, chest heaving. Boy punched in the door code, Dad fell inside, to the floor on his knees, and Boy skipped in after him like this happened every time.

Another dad had newspapers in one hand, and a two-year-old by the other. His lesson in how to reach and turn the massive door handle was received first as a magic trick and then as a sacred transmission.

Then one day, I decided to change my tune. I wanted to do an experiment. Enough with the sneaky, cheap espionage on the unsuspecting, even though it was fun. I practised basic phrases in Hungarian, and called out to people below, yelled “Hello”, and asked how they were. I tried and tried, called and called, waved and waved. They simply never heard and never saw. People tend not to look up.

As for this street, I’ve watched it from this perch for most of the last four years. At the moment, most shops were shut and heart-broken. Especially forlorn was the Kurdish barber and community centre, a beloved tradition. He could only open at certain times, only with a few people. The rest of the time, he – whose face was on the sign – paced around outside, like a sculptor with no clay. He needed to practise his craft, his art. He needed his village.

He used to be across the street where the tiny Latest Phones shop was now. He’d moved to these larger premises last year, and the new place was always full and buzzing, a social hub of men and boys, but not now. Now he was paying more rent when he had less trade, and I felt for him and his village. Men stuck at home with their families were a different sort of tragedy.



Starting from the corner, opposite me was the large crude Shot Bar, the terrible pizza place, the closed old tailor and a different phone shop every year. Underneath was the Thai massage place, the mystery apartments and underground parking with an entrance like a horror movie.

The excellent Turkish Plus grocery was gone altogether, and I missed their juicy dates, fistfuls of nuts and the fantastic smell of the place.

Very occasionally open was the speciality alcohol shop. The guy was sweet and chatty, and knew his trade well. I went there for birthday gifts, and he knew the histories and background of some unique-looking gins. A sign forbade you to photograph anything. I did not photograph anything. But if I were across the street and up a few floors, I’d certainly be trying.

I never saw that tailor’s shop open. It looked rusted shut. Then, one day, suddenly, the metal gate clattered open and there he was, Mr Tailor, a silver-haired, modest gent. He must have been here forever. I loved the old-style curvy lady hand-drawn on his sign, which looked pre-war, maybe pre-several wars. Some passers-by waved, called out to him, and one guy stopped his bicycle for a spirited and friendly debate. Mr T was a neighbourhood fixture. With luck, he was only there occasionally because soon he’d be completely retired. I felt he earned it. He looked like a nice guy worn out from a lifetime of quality work.



With quasi-quarantine, at first Budapest became silent and still. There were few people for a spy to watch, other than the occasional football match between employees with no customers and nothing to do –, mostly the Kurdish barber guys.

The apartment building had fallen so silent it was creepy. This huge place – seven floors and at least ten flats per floor – was usually a bustling tourist beehive, now fallen silent. Everyone had fled home except me and the owners who had flats there. The staff were stunned that I wanted to stay. It was spooky but OK, at first. Then everything changed suddenly, when noise exploded all over the building, all on one day. When dozens of large families moved in, all at once, I wondered if the owners had done a deal with the municipality.

Seen from outside, the face of the building changed massively: this new crowd had far more smokers and were at home all day, unlike previous visitors who were out sightseeing all day and seldom home. These were heavy smokers too, half a dozen crammed onto a balcony for two. With a scene like that happening on every balcony, it looked like a smouldering factory from outside.

We started nodding to each other in the corridor and even speaking a little, especially if I broke the ice with a young mum and baby. They all entertained dozens of friends and relations from out of town, in noisy dialects I couldn’t identify. It was a buzzing beehive.

The flat next door changed hands a few times. I was glad on the one hand to establish friendly relations, flatter their babies, but now there was a drawback. Espionage was blocked. The balcony was now anything but private. The gang was two metres away, almost all the time, and no sneaky photography was possible. My forays into aerial voyeurism had to be staggered between the boys’ cigarette time, and there was precious little of that. I was in spy jail.

I hated that they sprayed their cigarette butts all over the ledge. I asked them to clean it and they shrugged. Eventually someone cleared them. One group used an ashtray but most did not. Then the wind swept them down to the street, and it was vile that they fell on people.



Other thoughts on spying: our cousin Jolan, the one I wish I’d met, the one I reportedly look like, the fellow piano teacher – she was forced into some spying, very much against her will. It was just after the Second World War, in Communist Budapest. When the secret police knocked on her door, she thought her life would soon be over. They wanted her to spy on her neighbour, a pigeon-keeper they suspected of sending messages with his birds. She did what they said, and sent them reports. She was afraid not to. It was not exactly the words they had used to her, but how they spoke – threatening, menacing. With their reputation preceding them, an evil tone was all it took. They said if she didn’t help, they could make life awkward for her. So to speak.

No harm ever came to the bird-loving neighbour, as far as she knew. Jolan had a long life, and bravely struggled through the post-war ruins by teaching neighbourhood kids “the beauty of Beethoven and toilet paper”, according to Vera.

Jolan died in 1980, aged eighty-four. I had first been in Budapest just a few years before that. Her cousins told me that, in those years, she would not have wanted to see anyone, anyway. That lost chance still causes a pang.

I needed a cheer-up number. I needed an escape – we all did! We who had access to the internet fled there to escape into something entertaining. I went more deeply into the search for ancestral gossip. I went to Brooklyn in 1947, where our Uncle Bruno was a tabloid sensation.





CHAPTER X Poor Uncle Bruno


Desperate for entertaining gossip, I reluctantly turned to my mother’s side of the family, albeit pessimistically because, traditionally, they offered little in the way of scandal. When one got lucky, genealogy and gossip-hunting went well together, but her people only really produced one good outrage – a front-page story in a tabloid newspaper in 1947.

This was most certainly not from Mom’s German side, a long line of reliable farmers. No, her Latvian dad’s side gave us this moment of infamy. Mom’s beautiful Aunt Julia, her dad’s only sibling, married a guy named Bruno.

I’ll let the newspapers of the day tell the story. The downfall of Great-Uncle Bruno was on the front page of the New York Daily News. Although before my time, I recall hearing this family story told as our best public dunking. I don’t think anyone ever found out why Uncle Bruno hid nearly $40,000 in his office, or how the fire got started.

Tuesday, 11 March 1947, Daily News, NY (also our dad’s birthday, and he’d really shake his head at all this):

Firemen drag hoses into cellar at 14 Dunham place, Brooklyn, where stores of rubber cement and chemicals exploded after fire swept the lower floor of a four-storey factory building. Fire Captain Charles J. Stressler (pictured in photo) gets first aid from nurses and doctor after he was burned about the face and hands by the chemical blaze. Firemen cleaning debris found $38,900 in cash, in the drawer of a charred desk.

Fortunately, no one was hurt. That’s when the papers changed course for comedy-town. There was a jokey staged photo of two overacting young fit firemen, head in hands in mock dismay. The caption read:

Finders not Keepers. Firemen William Lorsch and Isaac Mosher of Hook and Ladder Company 199 ponder at scene of auto supply company blaze. They found $37,900 in cash in a charred desk drawer. B. C. Lewis, head of company, claimed the cash.

B. C. Lewis was Bruno Christian Lewis, aka our Uncle Bruno who married our beautiful Aunt Julia.

By the way, did you notice it was first reported as $38,900, and later as $37,900? Shall we just gloss over that for now?

This story ran for about ten days, referring to the money as “the 38 Gs”, “the dough” and “the greenbacks”, like it was a Jimmy Cagney movie.

The next day’s news said Uncle Bruno had not got his hands on the money yet. It was “being held by the Police Property Clerk’s Office. Affidavits were being investigated to establish his claim to ownership”, according to the Brooklyn Citizen newspaper, 11 March 1947, in the Local Roundup section.

Bruno had to bring paperwork and plead his case. A longer, tastier article followed, more than a roundup, in the Daily News, also on 11 March: “Cops Hold 38 Gs in Fire, by Neal Patterson”.

A couple of firemen, overhauling wreckage at a two-alarm fire in Brooklyn, pulled out the drawers of a fire-charred desk at 4.30am yesterday and discovered bundles of $1,000, $500 and $100 bills adding up to the dizzy total of $37,900.

They didn’t have to search far for a claimant. B. C. Lewis, head of the B. C. Lewis Manufacturing Company, Inc., in whose automotive accessories plant the fire occurred, had been wringing his hands for hours out in the street and telling firemen, “I’ve got money in there.”

Despite Lewis’s claim, the firemen turned the cash over to their superiors, who took it to the 11th Division Fire headquarters in Brooklyn. Later it was sent to the Police Property Clerk’s Office at Manhattan headquarters, under guard of two radio cops [not police but “cops”. It continued:]

Must Prove Ownership. Lewis, officials said, will have to establish his ownership of the greenbacks to the Property Clerk’s satisfaction. He also may have to answer questions from the US Department of Internal Revenue. Agents at the Brooklyn office indicated keen interest in the unusual hoard and the high denominations of the bills comprising it.

I know I shouldn’t, but I have a favourite quote here from Fire Commissioner Frank J. Quayle, who said, “Lewis made a claim but he was incoherent,” and I hope you can picture that as vividly as I can. He added, “The department refused to release the money to him.”

The next article started:

Seven Hurt in Blast. The fire, for which one alarm was sounded, was brought under control about 10.30 Sunday night, in the four-storey factory building in which Lewis’s offices are on the first floor. Shortly afterward, some chemicals exploded in the basement, and seven firemen suffered minor facial and hand burns. The second alarm was sounded then. Subsequently, firemen were left behind to sift the wreckage and make sure no live sparks remained.

There were two photos with captions: “Acting Deputy Fire Chief Henry C. Fuerbach turns over $37,900 found in fire-charred desk to Lt. George Staker” and “Police Lt George Staker counts cash as Deputy Fire Chief Henry C. Fuerbach looks on”.

Poor Uncle Bruno went on a campaign to recover his money.

12 March 1947, the day after The Big Fire, the Daily News printed a report headlined “Bankroll Goes Begging”:

Nearly $38,000 went begging yesterday in the office of Police Property Clerk Frank Leuci at 400 Broome St. in Manhattan. The money, exactly $37,900, was in 13 thousand-dollar bills, 14 five hundreds and 179 one hundreds. It was found by firemen when they accidentally overturned a cabinet while fighting a blaze in the office of the B. C. Lewis Company. Lewis lives at 47 10th St., Brooklyn.

I’m always surprised when newspapers give out people’s exact addresses. I don’t think they should. In any case, Bruno tried his desperate, hand-wringing best to claim it. He launched a new offensive.

“Leuci said that he will have to provide legal proof it is his dough, and answer questions about how he got it.” Leuci used the word “money” but this newspaper said “dough”.

On 14 March 1947, the Brooklyn Citizen confirmed Bruno was preparing his case, which took a few days. On 17 March, the Brooklyn Daily Eagle had the headline: “Pleads in Vain for Lost $37,000”. In vain? Lost? Poor Uncle Bruno, which was now his official nickname.

Bruno C. Lewis, Williamsburg rubber goods manufacturer, today sought for an hour and ten minutes to retrieve the $37,000 found in his burned-out offices last Monday.

Property Clerk Frank Leuci listened to arguments from Lewis; his attorney Edward T. Higgins; and an accountant, Louis Bassis, and then adjourned the hearing indefinitely, declaring he intended to make further investigation. Lewis and his representatives sought to prove beyond any doubt that the money belonged to him.

The money was found in a brown paper envelope, which evidently fell from an overturned cabinet, after a fire partly destroyed the building which houses Lewis’s Company and other concerns.

There were discrepancies in these reports. First, it was said firemen “pulled out the drawers” and found it. Later “they accidentally overturned a cabinet” and found it, where it “evidently fell from”. Evidently? Which evidence? This is mutating evidence, evidently. And, this is saying nothing of that missing grand at the top of the story.

The final word, as far as I could find, came from the Brooklyn Daily Eagle, 18 March, with an unhappy photo – a classic moment when a tabloid photographer grabbed someone by surprise with a big close-up, point blank on the nose, at the precise moment of the lowest ebb of his life. This was poor Uncle Bruno’s moment. Reminiscent of a mug shot, it bore the caption “Bruno C. Lewis, rubber goods manufacturer, leaving the office of the Police Property Clerk, after pleading for return of cash found after a fire last week. Property Clerk Frank Leuci, retaining the money, promised to think it over.”

Now that’s a quote worth quoting. Property Clerk Frank “promised to think it over”. What a sweet turn of phrase. Good old Frank.

So, RIP Poor Uncle Bruno. And, RIP those “38 Gs”, wherever they went to rest.

Or was it 39?



As a postscript, let me add what precious little we know about our mysterious Uncle Bruno, none of whose naturalisation documents say what his birth name was.

1886Born in Riga, Latvia (I found no birth document – parents not known).

1909Emigrated to New York. 5’5”, 140 pounds.

1910Declaration of Intention: he renounced “Czar Nicholas, Emperor of all the Russias”, and declared he was not an anarchist, or a polygamist. His “intention was to become a citizen of the USA and to permanently reside there SO HELP ME GOD” (capital letters theirs). He was twenty-four, living in East Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a machinist by trade.

1917Living in Brooklyn, New York, working in a machine factory.

1918Registers with the US military but does not serve in the First World War. He was thirty-two, a tool and gauge maker at the Scientific Tool Company. Eyes blue, hair mixed (?).

1922Married our Julia, here spelled Julianna. He got the licence in May 1922. I never found a marriage certificate.

1923Declaration of Intention to become a US citizen: he “renounced forever the present government of Russia”. He was a machinist, and this time his wife was spelled Julien.

1924Julianna declared her intention to become a US citizen. (She emigrated to New York from Latvia in 1911. Her brother, our granddad, did so five years earlier.)

1925Bruno started his own machine factory, which later had that unfortunate fire, cause not mentioned.

1938Became a US citizen, at the age of fifty-two.

1942Again registered for the US military but did not fight in the Second World War.

1946The Brooklyn Daily Eagle, in its social section, places someone named Bruno Lewis (without wife) at the silver wedding anniversary dinner for Mr and Mrs Herman Brander, at the Rivoli Restaurant, Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn. Either there were two guys by that name in that neighbourhood, or it’s our Bruno and maybe he was widowed by then. We don’t know when Julia died, but family legend said it was way before him. Other attendees that night were several couples – the Ben Brodies, the Roses, the George Walskys with George Jr; also Helen Freed, our Bruno (maybe) and Rube Belitsky – who should have been a character played by Edward G. Robinson. That whole list was placed here to guide your eyes to that sterling name.

1947That fire, those headlines. Poor Uncle Bruno. He was then sixty.

1963He died aged seventy-seven. We have no idea when the beautiful Julia died, but it’s been guessed that she died way before him. So, he survived and had a long life, despite the misadventure.





CHAPTER XI Self-Inflicted Hungarian Literature 101


About four years earlier, my first month in Budapest turned into five. The following year, this happened again. When this happened a magic third time, it became clear that my affair with Budapest was not just a visit or three, but was turning into a relationship. It was time to get to know each other better. I’d met many foods and streets. Now I needed to know who the locals’ favourite writers were, and what were their favourite books. That’s my road map anywhere.

Here’s what I asked every Hungarian I met, in person and widely on social media: “Advice sought. If I want to read Hungarian authors translated into English (sorry, my only language), where do I start? Please help create my Top Ten Hungarian writers and their books to read this year?”

There were hundreds of replies and warm-hearted exchanges. It turned into a huge, collective walk down literary memory lane. Several years later now, reading it again, I was touched by the outpouring, and many of my correspondents were touched too. Some of the old-timers said this was one of the finest discussions they’d had – on this often argumentative discussion page.

Also, recently, how marvellous it was to revisit this post, and see so many names that were strangers then, but not now. Even the ones I have not yet met are familiar by their online identities and pen-pally chit-chat. I thought I was just getting book tips, but no, I was meeting the book-lovers’ village. My People.

There was the English teacher who left the city but didn’t want to abandon her fifty or so very nice books, and so they are staying with me, for safekeeping. They sit there safely, as you read this, and I’ve been reading them. There are some real honeys in there. More on that later.

There was That Funny Smart Lawyer, who would later help me with a contract in Hungarian.

There were those who commented on everything, no matter what.

There were those who commented on their own speciality areas (mine now Book-Lovers of Budapest).

Some expats had lived in Hungary a long and knowledgeable time, and dispensed that wisdom in a variety of helpful or sarcastic ways, wanted or not.

There were many Hungarians expressing surprise and delight that anyone was asking. A lot of them compared notes with each other, and I felt I was witnessing a sweet reunion of those from the school, many years later. Obviously, there were spirited arguments in defence of one’s favourites.

There were book nuts and history nuts. My village was full of nut trees. And, as any one knowledgeable about nutrition can tell you, nuts are extremely good for you. (OK for most people. The metaphorical ones are good for everybody; can we leave it there?)

Many shared names of obscure or freshly sprouted little bookshops, and we all jumped on that info, like hungry gannets. Lots of us expressed fondness for Massolit’s café and cute garden. I enjoyed having my book launch there.

Meanwhile, I read as many of these recommendations as I could, and I am still going. We have created a lifetime project, it appears. During round one, their top favourites were not always my top favourites! But all nominees were worthy, this was clear. This was a culture that truly loved its writers and produced many fine ones. By popular request, by way of thanking everyone, and to continue the dialogue, I began writing reviews of each book in turn. These were well received. Certain Hungarians used the word heart-warming. Here are the highlights from that first year, the Self-Inflicted Hungarian Literature 101 course, round one.





Top Three Best-Loved Hungarian Books as Chosen by Hundreds of Hungarians


Antal Szerb, Journey Into Moonlight, a novel, 1937


A black comedy about a man who marries cynically, loses his bride on honeymoon, doesn’t seem to mind, starts acting oddly, wanders around Italy avoiding all responsibility and getting hopelessly enmired in nostalgia, mishaps, bungling and weird encounters, until this simply cannot go on any longer.

It’s entertaining, intelligent, ironic, sarcastic, cynical, funny – and a real literary gem even in translation. The language is gorgeously smart and witty. That’s possibly the very best thing about it – it is fantastically stylish, sophisticated, charismatic.

The characters are self-indulged upper-middle-class philanderers (both genders represented), but Szerb has an extremely charming style, whatever his confused characters get up to.

His style is a bit P. G. Wodehouse, but subtler and less silly, plus he offers more sex and decadence. You might think of Noël Coward. It’s not camp, but it waves a cigarette in one hand while swilling a cocktail with the other. Szerb’s better than either of them. High-class wit is what people admire most about him.





Jeno Rejto (English pen name P. Howard), The Frontier Garrison, an adventure comedy, 1939


The child in everyone loves him. He is still, to this day, an immensely popular writer. People absolutely always smiled when I said his name – joyous, gleeful smiles. Playful happy kiddie smiles. All the Hungarian writers I’ve learned about said they loved these books, which have also been made into popular films and comic books.

They’re usually set at sea, in the desert or in the military. In this story, Pidgeon is dishonourably discharged from the Naval Academy due to a stupid prank. How will he support his widowed mother and helpless sister? He indulges in a good insurance policy by joining the French Foreign Legion, in which he will surely die and they will get some money. Getting himself killed proves to be comically difficult to do. It’s a silly romp, full of brawls and fistfights as cartoonish as Tom and Jerry, or even Popeye.

There is a murder, a mystery, a ghost, international intrigue and espionage, and a filthy trek across the Sahara to the desperation capital of the planet where most people die, and yet he fails in his mission time and time again.

My only regret is that his beloved signature puns, wordplay, local jokes and silly idioms are just not translatable. But, there is still plenty of silliness to go around.





Ferenc Molnar, The Paul Street Boys, a novel, 1907


This is a classic. For some, it may be too Boys Only, but it is a classic – a tale of two gangs of boys fighting over territory, a derelict building turned into a fantasy playground, deep in Budapest’s district VIII.

My 2018 edition has a charming introduction by the author’s grandson, who was bombarded with requests for a reissue. It’s now been published in fourteen languages, and has found a whole new audience.

What’s quaint is the young gang’s military code of conduct for fights and turf disputes. They agreed to terms of engagement. There was a formal declaration of war at an appointed time, like a duel or a boxing bout. They used sand bombs and wrestling mainly. They won turf, not by cheating, bribing or getting a favour; they earned their wins. There was ritualistic kissing of a recaptured flag.

These were sacred war games.

They played at adventure, but harsh reality crashed down on them. We see the absurdity of warfare, large or small, and the fairy tale has a dark side.

There’s something mythological, or archetypal, about their war. The author’s grandson was right. It’s a classic that has survived the time machine.

By the way, Molnar was the playwright who gave us Liliom, the basis for the musical Carousel.





Top Three Best-Loved Hungarian Books, According to Me and a Good Few Dozen Others


Magda Szabo, The Door, a novel, 1987


To read her is to watch a fine artist at work. She is the most translated Hungarian writer of all, published in forty-two countries. She’s wise, intelligent, witty when you need it, brave about life’s horrors and profoundly insightful about relationships, between humans and their devoted dogs too. She writes with great sympathy and irony, but is not sentimental. By the end, I felt these were real people I knew well and cared about. She understands the human heart and all the weird, wonderful or ugly things that go on in there.

The narrator here is a famous and distinguished writer, struggling with a challenging career. Her uneducated but wise housekeeper is a formidable, bizarre personality, so eccentric as to be legendary in the area. Emerence the housekeeper is obsessively secretive, and has a freaky past.

Theirs is a kind of insane love story, over twenty years, with many twists and turns.

The crisis peaks when Emerence suddenly needs help in her old age, exactly when the Great Writer is to appear on national TV to receive a Great Prize, at which point the entire neighbourhood gets involved.

If you’re looking for one of the finest novels on this list, this would get my vote.

Also worth a mention is her most widely read novel, Abigél (Abigail, 1970), an adventure story about a schoolgirl in a boarding school during the war. It was made into a much-loved TV series. It seems like it’s for teens, but all ages (and I) loved this rite of passage story of a girl during wartime who learns the meaning of resistance.





Istvan Orkeny, One Minute Stories, anthology of short fiction, 1977


Istvan Orkeny is immensely popular and admired. His work is unique, inventive, surrealistic at times or just very very weird. The stories are extremely varied, always surprising and often odd. They are short gems, finely chiselled. He is a great absurdist, with hints of Jorge Luis Borges and Italo Calvino among his work. There’s also a second volume, and both are highly recommended.

For example, in these pages, you will find:

A play on words that could be a love letter to Spike Milligan

A time-trip puzzle

A doppelgänger (not quite) in a magic mirror

An actor rising from the dead, to do Lear (because the show must go on)

A heart-breaking drinking scene, after a funeral

A comparison between a corruptible man and a corruptible dog

Thomas Mann settling a bet

Albert Einstein politely refusing a pet dog offered as a gift

There is also the odd murder, when you least expect one.



He can be sarcastic, or even bitter – but is usually funny and cynical – in references to Soviet and other occupations, under which he and many others suffered but could not speak about. He found oblique ways to parody the madness of each successive wave, when life and politics threw everything they could in his path to prevent him from being a writer. He said, “I created more or less in secret, and I did so in the precious few hours I was able to wrench from the inexorable march of history.”

If I were going to read one short story collection over and over again, it would be this one – Hungarian or not.





Frigyes Karinthy, A Journey Round My Skull, non-fiction, 1939


Let me be slangy and frank: this completely freaked me out, it’s amazing and I can’t recommend it enough. It is truly one of a kind. This is my non-fiction top choice here, also in my all-time non-fiction top ten. It’s a record of the author’s brain surgery, in its early days in the 1930s when brain surgery had barely been invented. It’s harrowing; he did survive it – and he was awake during all of it!

He recorded everything from the first symptom of the brain tumour (hearing hallucinatory trains, at the same time each day), to the drills he could hear for real during the actual surgery, to his gradual recovery.

Karinthy was a popular humourist who wrote parodies and cabaret entertainment, and was well-known as a cynical, wisecracking smart-aleck. For someone like that to write about experiencing brain surgery was a remarkable combination. He was a compulsively sarcastic, highly literary clown.

This book is captivating. I wouldn’t want to read a serious account of such a scary thing. This is rare and valuable, from both a medical and a literary point of view. It might also make a good Halloween gift.

The 2008 edition has a delightful introduction by the great neurologist, sparkling author and all-round loveable guy, Dr Oliver Sacks, who called it a masterpiece.

Karinthy included as much science as he could clearly explain, and also spoke of his fantasies, fears, tendency toward abusiveness and a host of other emotions. As for the actual surgery, some people may need to skip the gorier descriptions, discussions of scraping scalpels, deep incisions, screaming drills and the like. I had to put it aside a few times, due to nausea. It’s easy to skip, if you must. Don’t let this put you off.

At first, it was like a detective story, to get a proper diagnosis. He told his wife nothing – and she was a doctor! It was almost too late, but she saved his life by organising the long, difficult trip through Germany’s Third Reich to Sweden and a pioneering brain surgeon.

Top appalling fact: only a local anaesthetic was used! The inside of the brain has no sensory nerves and feels no pain – who knew? A general anaesthetic was too risky for such a lengthy operation and they had to test his responses, so he had to be conscious. Although he could certainly not see everything they did, somehow they screwed him down tight, numbed his head and cut it wide open. He heard every break, crack and scrape. He recorded every damn thing he could remember.

Sweetly, later, this charming question came from the Swedish surgeon. “‘Who are you in your own country?’ he asked me in a suspicious tone. ‘I’m being inundated with letters from people in Hungary congratulating me on saving your life.’”

The whole saga is ghastly and fascinating at the same time. It’s a grotesque horror story, exciting and moving, occasionally hilarious, and 100 per cent non-fiction. I believe it’s one of the freakiest yet most absorbing stories you’ll ever read.

Top added eccentric facts:

Karinthy loved Esperanto and was president of the Hungarian Esperanto Society in 1932.

He wrote a famous translation of A. A. Milne’s Winnie the Pooh, which made it a cult book in Hungary.

After his brain tumour was removed, he recovered well, wrote a few more books, but died a few years later, in 1938, on holiday aged fifty-one. It was nothing to do with the brain tumour: he had a stroke when tying his shoelace.





Other Books


Sweetly enough, some people asked for my specific preferences. I was in search of literature from a variety of eras and styles. I wanted non-fiction about the area, and fiction set there too. I explained I was investigating my own ancestral history, and needed general historical background. That’s when many of them sent me to Sandor Marai, – and rightly so.

At this point in writing, I was halfway through his Memoir of Hungary: 1944–1948. Those years were so unhappy and ugly that sometimes I alternated reading Marai with Orkeny, who at least turned horror into black humour. I could not see Marai smiling, for all the respect I felt for him.

Taking a look at this country’s history takes a strong stomach, and it’s heavy going, but I felt a sense of duty. On the other hand, when I left Budapest with the winter, I left all my paperbacks there too, including the Marai diaries which only existed in paper form. Only e-books travel with me. So, there’s a nice little stack of paperbacks waiting to welcome me back.





Imre Kertesz, Fateless, a novel, 1975


This is sometimes translated as “Fatelessness” or “Destinyless”.

Here’s a paradox: history is sometimes best experienced in a novel, especially this one. This book is a large part of the reason why Kertesz won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2002. It’s an iconic coming-of-age story based on his boyhood time in a Nazi concentration camp. As grim as some things are, it’s amazing to see how people survive – in their minds, most of all. This fourteen year old never loses faith. “I simply supposed that the adult world had a duty to save me from that and get me home in one piece. I firmly believe that I have that childish trust to thank for my being rescued.”

This journey is told with great artfulness. Facts are revealed one by one, simply and clearly, step by step, until eventually the full and huge, nightmarish mural has been painted. And yet he stumbles through, an innocent teen who assumes he will survive, and indeed he does. He is the only one of his group who does.

He puzzled over why older inmates routinely smuggled food to teens, despite the risk. “This was just stubbornness… a certain highly refined, the most fruitful and useful form of stubbornness.”

After liberation, he went home but there was no home.

He survived and flourished. In his story, the more matter-of-fact his descriptions are, the more we feel astonishment at the miracle of his survival.



And so, I found one of my villages, the local book-lovers community. It’s a neighbourhood lined with handsome little nut trees and well worth a stroll.





CHAPTER XII Mask Comedy


Suddenly and unexpectedly, I found myself trapped in a foreign culture, and in a pandemic, with only one suitcase of belongings. Before you think this is a complaint, let me assure you it is not. I liked it. I chose to be trapped in Budapest.

But, it’s the one suitcase that presents new challenges. When you live out of a suitcase, there are few materials suitable for homemade masks, or indeed anything, if suddenly required. I didn’t like throwaway masks or throwaway anything, but the shelves were empty of them anyway. I wanted washable, reusable ones, since I’d consented willingly to comply and spray a minimum of germs or dangerous “cooties” around or at other people.

I only had a minuscule sewing kit, and access to How-To videos. Here I was reminded yet again of why I loathe (and mentally spit danger-cooties straight into the face of) most video tutorials. I hate videos with no text. I hate waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting for someone to get to the point. See what I mean? The case is simple:

With a text, I can skim to what I want in a fraction of the time.

That’s it.

Therefore, I watched videos under three minutes long – hundreds or what seemed like thousands of them. Thus ensued hand-stitching sessions in the evenings, when all work was done and I was brainless but not asleep. With good music or bad news in the background, I made do with a metre each of six colours of thread, a few safety pins and a needle. I borrowed scissors. The nail-clippers could not cope.





Mask Evolution


Mask evolution staggered on, and these were the stepping stones:





The Fake Gift


This was stupid. It arrived unwanted and unannounced, inside a box of printer cartridges ordered online. It was back in February when the Covid-19 story was just breaking, but was useless as a mask. The material was so flimsy, so lacy, so air-like, the merest touch tore it. It was a stage prop, and the “vent” did not open. It was a fashion joke, but if you had no real mask, you could pretend.





The Cut-up Sock


This took half a minute, was flimsy and thin, but sufficed for that first foray for food, but just that once, on the first hungry day of arrival.





Sock with Pantyhose Ties


The sock was opened, hemmed on two ends, with pantyhose legs fed through for ties. This stayed on and looked crazy and kept people away – i.e. from the insane bag-lady wearing pantyhose on her head.





Another Gift: The Pretty, One-Layer Waterproof


This was one-ply, strong fabric claiming to be waterproof yet breathable, adapted from swimwear – i.e. groovy, colourful patterns. A nice neighbour made them and even biked them to my flat (senior perk).





The Little Cotton Shopping Bag, Adapted


The appeal was ready-made handles. It was an (unwanted) gift from a (wanted) wine festival. A fold made a two-ply pocket for filters, and that’s when I ran out of thread.



I had to put on a mask to go out and look for ways to make new masks, or more than one of them, anyway, in that first crazy week when all this was new. I admit mask-wearing was not 100 per cent new to me. I’d seen it for the first time in Japan, where there was always someone with a cold wearing a face mask, trying to keep his cooties to himself. My culture did not do this. We sprayed it all into hankies and kept those in our pockets all day, clearly the enlightened version.

Essential shopping: thread, elastic and a cheap sewing kit with all the basics in miniature in a hideous pink box screaming that it was made in China by people who hate their lives, which I pity and from which I pray they escape.



May I go on a rant? Attendance is optional.

I learned sewing basics from my mother. While I hated it, I saw the benefit of the practicalities and learned those in earnest. She was an artful perfectionist and as skilled as a tailor, whereas I did crude repairs and was happy with that. Did I say happy? Not actually joyous, but satisfied that buttons stayed on and no more time was wasted. If I can learn these everyday skills, anyone can.

I have said this countless times to countless people over my lifetime, and it was neither funny nor successful – not once. Sometimes it was accompanied by the reminder (the ongoing, eternally repeating reminder) that I’d be happy (joyously happy without joking) to teach them this simple skill of button-sewing.

I repeat: I would not provide it but would teach it, which for some reason was an offensive idea.

Basic sewing is as easy as using screws and rawl-plugs to hold up shelves, or brushing your teeth. I can do both those things. Dad refused to teach me the first one or anything like it, so it wasn’t until I was thirty, at London Film School and building film sets, that I learned how to shake hands with power tools and simply get on with it.

In short, if I can learn to sew on a rogue button, then just about anyone can.

Traditions, eh? Some must die. But I digress. The final few design ideas were:

The Other Half of the Cotton Shopping Bag, pleated, two-ply with pocket for sock inserts since there were no coffee filters in the shops, even for coffee.

The Tea-Towel, fully pleated for maximum pocket space, elastic overhead, double-tie around neck, flexible nose-clip, pure cotton, washable. Green apple motif on the mouth as pretentious reference to artist Magritte. Voilà, this was the preferred mask this week.

Then, just when I had a variety of masks to choose from, I lost the desire to go out.





MAY


No Escape





CHAPTER XIII The Unique and/or Infamous Hungarian Language


My complicated relationship with foreign languages is a long and winding rocky road, but without sweet musical references. Or pleasure. Recently I felt I had no choice but to dutifully take the plunge and start to properly study and learn whatever was my latest local language – this month, Hungarian. Wherever I have roamed, I have tried to study the local language for at least an hour a day. Lately, this has been slipping in favour of just about any other activity available.

Here, I started in secret so that no one would expect anything. I thought perhaps someday I could eavesdrop a bit. Progress was so slow it was painful. There is history. There are issues.

I’ve had a wonderful life living and working in many different places, and I’ve done beginner-level courses in many different languages. Nine, in fact. I did my duty and gave it my best. Twice, I even crept toward the Intermediate category.

To add some spice, five of them had a completely different writing system: Russian, Hebrew, Japanese, Nepali and Thai. This was on top of the somewhat similar ones: French, Italian and German.

Hungarian, on the other hand, might have a sort of similar alphabet but that’s where all similarities stop.

There was some horrendous chaos in my brain-files for languages. I always had high hopes for acquiring a few languages over a lifetime. What was planned as an eight-course linguistic banquet ended up a mixed salad with everything thrown together in one rough trough.

For example, imagine if, in any of the above languages, you asked me something simple like “Coffee with milk?” I might blink like I’d forgotten where I was, and splutter back, “Ya, Da, Igen, Oui, Si, Hai, Chai…” (German, Russian, Hungarian, French, Italian, Japanese, Thai).

I could see nothing ahead but either comedy potential, strong depression and/or anger like a snapping turtle at any unsolicited advice.



I’ve taught English to many people, who all did well – who, in fact, were far better at language learning than I’ve ever been. Why did Hungarian seem harder than Thai, for example? If you search for the most difficult languages to learn on earth, Hungarian regularly comes in the top ten. This is thanks to its twenty-six cases (some say thirty-five) and numerous complex rules, along with Arabic, Japanese, Navajo and Mandarin.

As languages go, Hungarian is an island. It’s surrounded by Slavic, German and Latin-based languages, but it’s nothing like any of those. It doesn’t resemble any other language on the planet. It’s totally different in its grammar and vocabulary and everything.

It’s weird.

Strangely, though, it’s a bit like Finnish. In theory, long ago people from the Way North of what’s now Russia came south, split and now – after many centuries – they still have a few similar words and structures, which are like nothing else, and only like each other. But only a little and it’s a sketchy link.





Is Anything Easy About Hungarian?


It hasn’t got grammatical gender. No German “der, die, das”. No French “la, le, les”. I like this very much. No she/he/it, just one word for everyone and everything. Bravo for that.

It’s claimed there is a simple verb tense system, with only three tenses: past, present and future, whereas many European languages average between ten and fifteen. But I instinctively believe there is a catch with this, and will only believe this claim if I ever see proof.

It is a phonetic language, and once you get the writing system, it is consistent. The accent always falls on the first syllable.





The Challenges


It’s been called an agglutinative language, like old Sumerian. That’s a helpful tag, isn’t it? This means words have lots of little endings and added bits tagged on, rather than using separate prepositions.

Its longest word has forty-four letters and has no English equivalent. Megszentségteleníthetetlenségeskedéseitekért. This allegedly means something like, “for your [plural] continued behaviour as if you could not be desecrated”. You may need that.

Many say you must master the grammar to be understood at all, or you’ll probably convey the opposite by accident. This problem happens all the time. Thousands can attest to this and I certainly can. There is something very different in how each language handles positives and negatives. It’s all too easy to reverse them, when jumping the border. Online automatic translations are only good for a word at a time, not even whole phrases, and they make a mess, more often than not.

There’s also “Vowel Harmony”, which means all those little endings have loads of little variations, depending on where you attach them. Vowel harmony is also used by Korean, Mongolian and Turkish.

Are you totally annoyed or bored yet? We haven’t even begun!

My favourite comment on the topic was, “The grammar is a pain. This whole language is a pain. I was born here and even I think so!” The speaker said this with great feeling. There is plenty of joking about what a nuisance many people find this system of quirks.



So, I faced language number nine, with less time, less energy, less brain – and much less conviction. I was running out of steam for anything, let alone things I was proven to be bad at, slow at, or both.

Still, one must at least pretend to be a good guest; so slowly and reluctantly, into the dark Hungarian forest I crept.





CHAPTER XIV Covid Update


May 2020, Week 2, Budapest


The good news was that when wearing a mask in public, you could talk to yourself much more. I could go full-on crazy bag-lady sometimes and actually get away with it, depending on the volume. I swore and muttered and it was such a relief. Silver linings were everywhere, even if they sounded like Tourette’s.

I also started eating all the stinky foods I could find – terrible cheeses, awful sausages, ripe sardines. I was munching garlic like they were grapes. It was divine.

And that, for now, was the end of the nice news. I understand if you skip to the next chapter.

Last night it hit me harder than previously. Mr C and Mr C were so sweet to respond to my bad back situation, and they delivered heavy groceries. We didn’t hug, we didn’t touch, we didn’t have a real visit. True, they had their groceries to get home, and they were both busy working people. But it felt so weird, and I plummeted into a dark, depressed funk directly after they left.

In general, after work I watched videos, ate too much, then watched TV while I designed and stitched up new and improved masks, rather than going out and using one. I was not overly fond of going out. I used to adore what I called Grid Walks, trying to walk every street, end to end. These days I adored my bed and my books and hiding.

The Corona Era was different to anything we’d ever known. There was an underlying tension, a deep, general uncertainty. As for restrictions, everyone was annoyed at the very least, livid at times. Things were moody and volatile.

For example, there were days I scarcely got through my work, and sobbed afterward for no specific reason. I often did not want dinner, which was alarming, unheard of, a very bad sign indeed since, usually, I wanted to dive into whatever food was available, immediately.

It felt stupid when I was not on the front line, as it was now called. But fear was in many places. There was little way to guess one’s chances of getting it, getting it badly, or even dying from it.

One day at the supermarket checkout, ahead of me were two very tiny, very old ladies, like birds made from sticks, in their nineties at least, thirty years ahead of me. Did I wish to be this ancient, even if I remained nearly capable of grocery shopping? I was not sure. When I was very young, a pre-schooler, I was determined to reach the age of a hundred, no matter what. This was no longer an attractive option, no matter how I applaud and throw mental roses at anyone who gets that far.

Here, many of the young and not-so-young were quite clear in their willingness to watch lots of older people dying much sooner than expected. They were rather cool about this, advising everyone else to be athletic, eat well and boost their immune system. Their message to Sickies and Oldies? Hard luck: go die. People referred to Darwin in new and creative ways.

Supermarkets became the key arena for mostly emotional territorial games, dominated by ill-explained rules about seniors having their own shopping hours. Working mothers, the disabled and the ill all objected, with reason. Everyone argued and no one understood the rules.

Often a thuggish-looking man would stop me at the entrance, and ask how old I was. I was sixty-three but there was some cut-off of sixty-five. Sometimes they hurried me in, sometimes they chased me away. It was like a changeable speakeasy with a secret entry code like “the eagle has landed”, or maybe “the eagle is old and hungry and your rules make no sense”.

Aggression and bullies now ruled the supermarket. It was crowded and frenzied. Everyone was impatient and short-tempered, even panicky. One day, I ran to escape the mayhem and took refuge in the big empty lobby to pack my shopping in peace. This was not to be. A young man in sloppy attire saw me from afar, approached and stood right next to me, oddly close, glaring, intimidating, macho and angry. I’ve no idea why.

I called out, “Two metres!” indicating he should back off. He stayed and argued.

More firmly, I called out, “Two metres!” and motioned him away. He glared, waited, then took a small step back, arguing in Hungarian I didn’t understand. I repeated. He repeated. I repeated much more loudly. He muttered and slunk away.

Did he even work there? Was he security staff suspecting me of shoplifting? Was he just a weird, stupid bully, picking on a tiny old woman? I’ll never know, but it reminded me of all the threats I’ve ever known, all previous predators, all the dangers and risks, sometimes every day, that many different people know all too well, beleaguered by various potential attackers. I rushed home.

He was the grandson of the Nazi-sympathising Arrow Cross Party, the ones who shot people into the Danube, three at a time, tied together: they shot the middle one, who drowned the other two, saving two bullets. It’s also one of several guesses as to how over a dozen of our cousins disappeared around that time.

By all accounts of the period, the Arrow Cross were worse than the Nazis who, in their bizarre way, had a strict code, whereas Arrow Cross members were often ungoverned drunken louts with a licence for sadism, random bullying and abuse. It is with a heavy heart that I point out that Hungarian history is filled with tragic thuggish ugliness like this.

On my frantic rush back to the alleged safety of home, I passed a heavily drugged-up guy sleeping, standing up, on the pavement. He really was asleep, and he really was standing upright. A truly hard-boiled photo-journalist would have snapped a picture, but for me, it was just too pitiable. I pitied everything about him and what had brought him here and now.

We were not yet fighting for food, but you could feel the hysteria wanting to brew. Maybe we would see anarchy and riots when money and food became even more scarce. I might see this from my balcony. My camera would be ready.

If there’s a revolution, I’ll shoot it from here, I thought. That’s my kind of shooting. After all, as Gil Scott-Heron said in his song, “the revolution will be televised”.



As for smaller matters, it was confirmed that, for now, there would be no research trip to Grandma’s. The trip planned for March would not happen in May either. Perhaps it would happen in the autumn or not, or next year or not, or eventually with luck, or maybe never. All of these were possibilities. Silver linings were flexible. They came and they went, like a break of nice weather.

Looking back, most of us did not predict the depth of the shock waves this virus would bring. We underestimated the contagiousness of it, and its place in human history. When that sank in, my knees buckled and everything slowed down – brain, eyes and ears, the lot. After a shock, one needs rest and recovery. Did I rest? I did not. I was an idiot and repeated a treasured, often-repeated error. I revved up my workaholism like a mad racing driver. When stressed, add more stress, that was the idea. This mistake I saw later, but was glad I saw it, and acted more wisely.

Eventually.

This was not the worst of it. There was something worse than losing my enjoyment of food, which is perverse and unnatural. I was also occasionally unable to locate any sort of sense of humour; I had no way to make jokes – even sick, demented dark jokes, which we needed more than ever. I was glued to the words of all the political satirists available, and all of the comedians I could find. Sometimes when I hit a wall, I wondered: what would Lenny Bruce say? Sometimes even He didn’t know.



US citizens were barred from Europe, but everybody snuck in via the UK. The EU wanted to bar UK citizens too. I wish they could have but doubted this was possible. Scotland and England were taking different approaches. The former was doing well and their government had popular support, whereas the latter at one point had a death toll higher than the entire EU put together. My dear Scotland, particularly post-Brexit which they thumpingly opposed, could now be seen as the abused, long-suffering spouse of an abusive England who forced things on her without her consent. She wanted a divorce and I was squarely on her side. That metaphorical scenario said it all.

By the way, friends who moved to Albania got trapped there. They wanted to use it as an affordable jumping-off pad, being travel-maniacs who wanted a different destination every few weeks. Most nations were strict about who they let in, but not many places said you could not leave, like Albania did.

People were getting stuck in all sorts of ways.

Vera had amusing information from Vienna about her family who “have hardly gone out”.

They like the caution, and working from home. I help with studying, invigorating for me. For example, snails are hermaphrodites. They have to be two, but they don’t look at each other. Mollusc porn – really cute…

I hug you, I often think of you, but I struggle with reflection and writing is reflection. Somehow I have the feeling that everything flows past me and I am actually somewhere else. But where? It sounds like Agi, who says she wants to go home (where she already is) to Andreas (who is right there). She does not want to be in this house with this stranger next to her. It’s so embarrassing to her.



From Apu:

I am tired. I am 91 and have to experience that Agi is wandering more and more in the dark forest. I fear what happens to her when I am no more. It is overwhelming.

I am afraid you will remain locked in Hungary for months. Even if travel is allowed, it means 2 weeks of quarantine, both sides.

But, everything has an end, even corona. The only question is, when?



Love from Andreas.





CHAPTER XV Almost a Mugging


I walked home with groceries and saw a long line of people up our street. A lady was using orange chalk to mark how far apart people should stand. Everyone looked poor and in need of a shower, and gratitude was clearly flowing. One of the restaurants was running a soup kitchen. Their usual tables had been pushed to the walls and stacked up. The main room held a team of people behind steaming cauldrons, ladling the contents into pots being delivered elsewhere, while individual takeaway cartons were handed out to people in the queue.

Everyone waited patiently, eyes glued to the front. The line went by my door. I used my buzzer key to open it, and suddenly, a man abruptly shoved from behind and ran inside, ahead of me. Some version of this now happened here every day. All the security guys in the lobby were gone, however sleepy they may have been. Open house was impossible to prevent. There was often a crowd of loiterers waiting for someone to come or go, and then they jumped in, usually to disappear quickly up the stairs. They were always young, male and strong. Maybe they were visiting friends, some of them? Sometimes I asked them, but I did not speak any language they acknowledged. Anything I said or did was ignored. So, there were plenty of occasions when I circled the block several times before seeing a chance to dart in and slam the door quickly behind me. This time he was too fast.

Next, this young strong guy was walking closely behind me, weirdly close, so I turned suddenly to face him and make eye contact. He dashed away and stood by one of the two lifts. I went to the other. I hoped that was a good sign. The new custom was to always take separate lifts, which people usually did anyway. Maybe this was OK.

Not today it wasn’t.

My lift arrived, I got in and, just as the doors started closing, he suddenly tried to push his way in. I was standing front and centre, when automatically my arms sprang up in the well-known big X-shape over the chest which says NO! and also, Back Off! I shouted “Nem!” – No. He stared then tried again, but I held my ground, blocked him and said “No!” in English, which he also understood perfectly well. I pointed him to the other lift. I used my well-practised, head teacher “Behave yourself!” tone of voice. He understood perfectly and he was angry. He tried again and I defended again. I think my face said, “I mean it: I will not back down”.

Finally, he stopped. His eyes burned with insult and outrage, but he stopped. He let the doors shut. Up I went. I’ve no idea if he’d have beaten me up, or just grabbed my bag, or what. Was he just plain crazy? What exactly had I just avoided? How bad might this have been?

By the way, the crossing of the arms over the chest to say “No!” was an instant reaction because I’ve rehearsed it. It’s not enough to just agree to the idea of it – one has to practise. That’s not a joke or exaggeration. I have been bullied a lot in my life, in a thousand different ways and situations. I have worked on how to prevent it happening again. Also, dammit dammit dammit, I really wish I had been taught more of these things when I was young!

This time, I was scared but also being angry was useful. I was officially fed up. If I regret anything in life, it’s that I did not fight back against bullies sooner and harder. But I was too afraid, back then, and also now too – but I’ve had a glimpse at the idea that you can still act when terrified. It just needs clear advance planning and rehearsal, like the defensive habit of carrying keys between your fingers.

It was music, of all things, which taught me this. If you rehearse something well enough, you can do it any time – even when you are scared out of your mind, in a state of numb, dumb shock, no brain, shaking hands, dry mouth, the lot. You can still do it; you can still function – if you practised enough beforehand. It sounds too simple, but it is so deep. I saw this as a teacher thousands of times. Muscle memory is a big part of this, as is plain old practice. Your body will sleep-walk however your habits trained it, whenever your vision goes cloudy.

On a practical note, I took the stairs from then on. I needed exercise and it was five floors up.

Some people warned against the stairs too. But the architecture in this case was favourable, open with no blind spots. On one side, it was open to the courtyard garden; on the other side, to every floor. So, if I got mugged on the stairs, plenty of people would hear it. Nothing would prevent it, but for sure, it would be no secret.

More and more people were becoming more and more desperate, so increased theft was to be expected. Some little old lady with her grocery bags was an easy target. I kept forgetting that now I was Some Little Old Lady too. However, any potential attacker would have underestimated my very big mouth. This is one of my better self-defence weapons, as is a firm attitude and quick response.

In the film Mrs Doubtfire, Robin Williams, disguised as an old lady, faces a street thief who tries to steal her handbag, but she totally bashes him, without a moment’s hesitation, and sends the thief running away empty-handed.

Without a moment’s hesitation. That’s the noteworthy thing. It’s a reflex, automatic. It can be trained. Unless you’ve been raised from a young age to defend yourself, quick reactions will need rehearsing. That’s just a retired music teacher’s observation. Always be ready to go on stage, however scared you might feel, and have your message well-chosen and well-rehearsed. Be ready. Don’t let that moment pass by. Some windows only open for a moment. Be ready, then spring.



When I posted this story on social media, it got a big response, a lot of concern and heartfelt empathy. People expressed intense feelings about facing a variety of bullies of the past, present and future. I was gratified to join hands on that issue. What do we wish we’d been taught about how to defend ourselves? I wish it were taught in every house, every school, every workplace.

I thought about moving to a new neighbourhood, but this was a challenge. There was plenty of evidence to suggest it was difficult to find an English-speaking, honest and trustworthy landlord here. I wasn’t optimistic. For now, I gave up. I didn’t even look.





JUNE


Take Me to the River





CHAPTER XVI New Hood, New Home


Everyone’s seen big changes in their lives that they did not see coming. A few of mine were for the best. Sometimes it’s better to stagger through the fog with a blindfold on – not usually, but sometimes. With some of the places I’ve ended up, if you’d told me where I was going, I might not have had the nerve. As a paratrooper once told me, when they lined up to jump, some people danced out while others had to be pushed.

I’ve not exactly been head-hunted constantly in life. But it’s happened in one useful area, which is being sought as a good tenant and neighbour. In this category, I am a great catch. More than once, I’ve been wooed to new accommodation by reasonable landlords seeking a nice boring person who is tidy, honest and employed.

I was still dismayed at the market for flats in Scotland, now inflating thanks to Brexit, and concluded I couldn’t hunt effectively until I got there in person. I had no idea when that might be. The plan had been to go there in the spring, which was delayed to the summer, and now autumn was as good as it was going to get. I had to be patient. I would remain in the homeless Hungarian gypsy encampment until then. That was the plan – if you call that a plan.

Then, unexpectedly, I got a message from a couple who had vacated their Budapest city flat and moved to the country. Their need was sudden: they still owed several months’ rent on the city place and quickly needed someone acceptable to step in soon. Would I like to be that someone? Was that the sound of eyebrows leaping?

I went first thing the next morning. Later some folk called it a lucky break, but, no, this was neither luck nor anything random. I’d earned it. I was head-hunted for good reasons – nice, boring, tidy, honest, employed reasons. Also, the previous candidate was rejected because he was a musician who promised to be noisy at least five hours a day. After he was vetoed, I was a dreamboat by any measure.

What a fine flat it was! As high quality a Plan B as I could dream of – even if it meant Scotland had to wait. Nice neighbourhood, near the river, a cool if strange Bauhaus style with a pretty, honey-coloured parquet floor and a kitchen window over a garden with big full trees. A thick leafy walnut tree, right by the window. I could be a proper resident of a great city where I even had a few friends already. Signing a lease for a whole year was a scary, unexpected commitment, but if I needed to leave, I could find someone like they’d found me. There was no reason to refuse this treat arriving on a platter. It sought me. I said yes.

After all the nightmare stories I’d heard about renting here, it was a relief to meet a nice landlady whose English, terms and contract were fine. She was busy with work plus two kids, but her dad helped too, and they seemed responsible types.

Finding my cute dream place in Scotland was now on next year’s list, if not beyond that – a thought which panged. This change in plan was poignant but realistic.

I contacted a lawyer I’d noticed in many Hungarian online discussion groups, a clear and subtly sardonic yet willing public adviser to a regular stream of idiots – sorry, I meant to say adults behaving as spoiled children – about how rules and laws work here, whoever you are and no exceptions. She looked at the contract and we had a good talk. I tried to pay but she said it was nothing, and thanked me for some free e-books I gave her previously. I do love a happy barter exchange.

The signing was friendly yet ceremonial. I introduced myself as a Brexit refugee, which was well received. Karesz was there as witness and interpreter, as was the sister of Mrs Landlady Bp (to distinguish her from Mrs Landlady in Thailand, on my nickname chart).

I liked how it was all scheduled around their children, babysitters and a graduation. I trust business that works like that. Kids increase the likelihood of the trust factor, I’ve usually found.

After signing and sealing and paying, this fine scenario proceeded down the mosaiced, cool stony stairs, as we mentioned an outstanding issue. She wanted a particular document notarised, which declared my vow to vacate as agreed. It was to prevent squatters. To arrange for a notary in English was not easy or quick, but strictly speaking, the keys were not mine until I signed it. I was willing but it just meant a delay. There was a moment on the stairs where she decided to trust me.

“When do you want to move in?” she asked.

“Yesterday,” I said, “but the contract says the first of next month, so that’s when I sleep here.” I said I’d go sign the I Won’t Squat Thing first. I asked permission to bring in my bed, for example, in the meanwhile, and some other things. She thought, she smiled, she gave me the keys. Trust is such an excellent, golden thing.



Back at the homeless shelter and base camp, I finally found someone in the office. It was the Romany guy, the sweet one. He was one of the few patient enough to teach me phrases in Hungarian, however slow I was to remember. He was a professional musician – he played with the 100 Gypsy Violins of Budapest Orchestra – but was currently without work or students. He was doing this job instead.

I asked him to photocopy the new contracts. Of course he noticed it was for a different flat. Later he relayed a message from his boss, the owner, that they could lower the rent if I stayed. It was too late. I arranged for my final days there, and discovered the degree to which I was overpaying in those final weeks, maybe months. Mr Fiddler bashfully admitted it was true. Of course it was not his decision.

Sadly, it was his last day too. It was lucky I’d dropped in, because I had a cute baby-socks-and-matching-hat gift set for his newborn girl. It had to be a first grandchild, judging from the way their group was beaming with that particular euphoric daze. His mother brought schnitzels with garlic that smelled heavenly and they even gave me a taste. The new dad was happy as can be, and he would have no job tomorrow.

The hotel lowered their offer again. I was not trying to bargain. I was simply leaving.



A unexpected new era had begun. Onward through the fog, was all I could think. Suddenly, I had a base in Europe again, for the first time in twelve years, and it’s in Granddad’s home city. I was sailing on that idea.





CHAPTER XVII Goodbye to the Old Hood


Grid Walks resumed in spirit, but were no longer grid-shaped like when I first arrived and was trying to systematically memorise the place. Since then, over the last few years, I’ve spent a total of over twelve months here, a sweet milestone. Now, whenever I left the house for a walk, I could spin the compass and choose from many familiar routes, inevitably tied to ancestral gossip and, of course, interesting snacks.

During my first week here, I did a tour of the VII, the old Jewish Quarter. I’d chosen that district because it was on my list of fifty places where different members of my family used to live. They were all over the city, but the biggest collection was here. Back then, we heard the history. This month, I revisited favourite ancestral sites, in between packing to leave the area. They were sentimental, even silly, farewell journeys, since I was only moving a short tram ride away. But it would be different. Daily strolls would be totally different, emanating from a different hub, with different history to absorb, different snacks to procure. Proper goodbyes were in order.





Goodbyes


Akacfa (acacia) Street, VII


At the bottom, near Blaha Lujza square (she was a singer), at number 5, was Dr Salamon Nagy, one of our lawyers. He lived there while waiting to marry our Lujza Szende (born Spitzer). They created a small property empire, and had a son, Tamas. Maybe someday I’ll know more about them. As for the beautiful building, today it’s still impressive overall, with a slimy kebab shop at street level.





Dohany (tobacco) Street, VII


Walking in the direction of the Great Synagogue, number 16 was where the above Lujza lived with her family, which consisted of big dad Miksa with the big moustache, chubby mumsy Szidonia, three younger sisters and the baby boy Oszkar. I thought of them (starting with the eldest) as:

Lujza, smart and business-like

Gizi the dancer

Klara the quickly divorced

Margit (Zsa Zsa) thrice-married

Oszkar the baby and the only boy (whose wife left him and ran for MP).

Lujza and her hubby lived here most of their lives, after their parents were dead and siblings elsewhere. Ironically, it was near the beautiful Great Synagogue in which absolutely none of them got married. “We were enlightened Jews, secular, non-religious,” insisted contemporary cousins in a slightly offended, “well obviously” tone of voice and dismissive wave of the hand.

I pictured them, recalled relevant gossip and longed for a bit more, every time I walked by.





Wesselenyi Street, VII


I always went past the mural of the sexy freedom fighter of 1956 featured on Time magazine’s “Man of the Year” cover. This gets my eye every time and I’m not the only one. Then I remember I am a coward, which is not sexy at all.

The big red-brick school on the next corner was a hospital – or probably more like a struggling infirmary – during the Second World War, in the Jewish Ghetto where victims of the Nazis and their local collaborators were incarcerated. Great-Uncle Elemer Szente was in there. It was only for a day – in fact, on the Ghetto’s very first day – and on that day, he died by suicide via gas poisoning. When I told Cousin Andreas’s wife Agi, she cried, “Good for him! I only wish I had the same nerve!” I knew what she meant. Most of us would not have the nerve.

Elemer’s ex-wife, Great-Aunt Frida, was also in the Ghetto, elsewhere. She survived the winter on Kazinczy street, but not much more. She was old. She succumbed first to the cold, then a gangrenous leg, then heart failure, dying just a few days before Hungary was liberated at the end of the war.

I wish I knew what had happened to their daughter Angyalka, the one who married the artist Jozsef Suto. She’s on our Unaccounted For List.

Frida also had three kids from her first marriage to Sandor, an upholsterer-turned-furniture-merchant. There was a boy Pal who was mostly a mystery, and a girl Erzsebet who died aged seventeen of some kind of madness or brain ailment not fully translated. The other son Laszlo became a journalist for a Social Democratic newspaper, struggled with lung problems and died of TB. Jolan the pianist tried to help him but could not.





Kertesz (gardener) Street, VII


Every time I went up Kertesz street, which crosses Wesselenyi, it felt different after I had read the work of that eponymous writer, the only Hungarian to win the Nobel Prize for Literature, although many won in science. And whenever I strolled past the nearby Liszt Academy of Music, it reminded me of where I spent so much of my very first visit in the 1970s, listening to fine young music students when that’s exactly what I myself was trying to be.





Kiraly (king) Street, VII


It was a joy to walk all over this city and pass our family history. On Kiraly was where the bubbly Olga lived with husband number three, Bruno, in her lawyer, doctor, lawyer series. I wonder if this address was where she operated her home lunch-room after the war, where Jolan took her teenage nephew Andreas every day. This was when Jolan became his second mother, because his real mother Lili died on arrival at Auschwitz. The old Andreas was still friends with a guy his age whom he met on that train. It was Jolan’s idea to ask Olga’s Bruno to help Andreas reclaim his family home, which had been confiscated.

Jolan’s the one whom the Vienna cousins said I resemble. We were both piano teachers, great book-lovers, independent types. Every so often, they’d stare at me for a while and then start talking about her. I think Jolan and I shared a mysterious DNA link.





10 Barat Street, VIII


If I headed toward Keleti station and district VIII, it meant good second-hand clothing shops and African cafés. Then I could pass where Jolan sheltered young Andreas after the war, where later his teenage daughter Vera would come to stay on adventures behind the Iron Curtain, sleeping on mats with her feet under the piano.





54 Sziv Street, VI


Sziv means heart. This place was the heart of the Spitzer mini-empire. Great-grandma Sarolta inherited it from her mother Johanna. I wonder what Johanna’s two sisters got. It was indeed the whole building, not just a flat, which stunned me when I heard. I never knew people who owned whole buildings, but apparently we used to.

Sarolta didn’t live her adult life there, but perhaps it was where she grew up. Her eldest, Roza, lived there all her life. Roza’s eldest Margit was born and died there, a clerk and dutiful spinster – so dutiful she waited for her mother to die, and then she died a week later, all at the very end of the Second World War.

Roza’s two surviving adult sons lived there until they married. One moved back when he divorced, and I have a feeling the other one did too, although I don’t know why I assume his marriage didn’t last. Roza’s daughter Paula died as a teen, and son Imre died young as well. He died the same year as his dad.

A few doors away at number 48 was one Erno Kurzweil, owner of a glass factory that he ran with his father, and who married Sarolta’s niece, Margit, our Zsa Zsa, on her first of three husbands. Kurzweil and Son Glass adverts abounded in the early 1900s. Neighbourly Sarolta must have been the conduit or matchmaker between Erno Jr and Margit, youngest daughter of Sarolta’s brother Miksa of the big moustache. I picture Margit as his baby, the darling, youngest of his four girls. Margit other husbands were a mystery man who died, and an army general.

Records and drawings to do with this building exist from its construction in the late 1800s to the 1930s, at which point this folder has no documents at all until about the 1950s, where suddenly, new owners’ names appear, and business appeared to move on. Later, I’d see this pattern with about half a dozen buildings.





33 Eotvos, VI


This was where Elemer Szente fled in 1915, when Frida divorced him after eleven years and one daughter. He’d taken on her three kids from her first marriage to Sandor. The fourth was their Angyalka. How did Frida meet him? Elemer worked for her brother Markus, who ran an electrical engineering company. The prenuptial agreement stipulated that if they split, alimony and child support money would be taken directly from Elemer’s salary. Markus sounded like a protective surrogate father. There were quite a few hefty provisions in case he left Markus’s employ, but Elemer signed up for the lot and took on Frida’s three kids as well.

Years later, one of those kids, Laszlo the left-wing journalist, was living right next door at number 35 when he married Adel Bek in 1939. He survived Nazis and Communists but TB got him in 1945.

Meanwhile, Elemer moved to Pannonia street, not far away in the XIII, where he’d be forcibly removed in 1944 to the Ghetto where he decided to end his life then and there.





58 Vorosmarty Street, VI


Laszlo was born here, at the family home, where it looks like Frida stayed with her parents, and her first husband Sandor moved in there, to soon produce three children.

The family had been there from at least 1880 to 1910. Whatever they lived in, they owned, having bought (not built) it in 1894. Whether this was a room, a flat, a floor or a building, I did not know.

From those early days until the Second World War, I’ve no idea where Frida lived, until they chucked her into the Ghetto in 1944 when she was sixty-seven. By early 1945, she was gone.





Izabella Street, VI


This was the scene of one of our most painful dramas, the break or feud of our last century, when Granddad’s sister Berta died giving birth to her second daughter, Lili (mother of Vienna cousin Andreas). This crisis was the start of many further troubles, and a huge rift was born. Only now are there shreds of mending it.

Berta’s husband Jozsef Peto was not a popular guy with his mother-in-law Sarolta. He was a dreamer, romantic, irresponsible, bad with money, and possibly sweet but lazy. He and Berta were given a shop to run, although this was a disaster waiting to be revealed. In 1896, Berta and Jozsef had their daughter Jolan, but it was a mere two years later when Berta died giving birth to their second daughter Lili.

This almost killed Sarolta. She’d watched most of her seven siblings die young. When her daughter Berta died too, you could say she lost her mind with grief. Then on top of that, when the family stepped in to help with the shop, it was discovered the shop was bankrupt, had fallen heavily into debt, and the stock had been stolen by workers. Rumour had it that Jozsef tended to be upstairs reading love poetry to Berta. Now the shop was defunct and Berta was dead.

The great matriarch Sarolta went truly mad, and made a truly mad choice: she blamed Jozsef for the death of her daughter. She banished him and the newborn Lili, never to be welcomed there again, but she kept the toddler Jolan and raised her there, in the city. Jozsef returned to the countryside and found foster parents for Lili, a modest farming couple who took her in and raised her.

It was odd for me to find documents of these two sisters who were raised separately. One was with her gran in the city, one was out in the country, and naturally I wondered why. I asked friends to speculate, and there were emotional reactions such as: these things happen, you’ve no right to judge, it doesn’t mean anything.

Here it did mean something, although I didn’t know what for several years, until Andreas explained. The two sisters never knew about each other until they were in their teens. It was later they became close. These two branches of the family didn’t know about each other for over 120 years until I found Lili’s son Andreas. We bridged that gap. We built that bridge.





15 Lipot (Leopold) Korut (boulevard), V


Whereas Vorosmarty was where her kids lived when they were little, this was where Sarolta moved when she was widowed in 1912. It was the posh V, on the big boulevard now known as St Istvan. There’s a world of named and renamed streets in Budapest for each regime that has marched through.

They were across and diagonal from the beautiful Comedy Theatre. She lived there until her death in 1935, when she was in her eighties. Her electrical engineer son Markus was there until he married in 1918. Her granddaughter Jolan stayed there loyally until her own marriage in 1927. Widowed Frida with kids was there too, possibly for quite a while. I reckon lots of cousins came and went over those years.

Meanwhile, my evenings now consisted of packing up a rolling suitcase and maybe a rucksack, and taking a modest heap of stuff over to the new place. It was astonishing how much of it was food. Or books. Next month I would move in for real.

I was getting nervous, thrilled in a sweet way. A new home was like a new romance. We met, we liked each other, and now we could finally be alone together, without chaperones or prying eyes. We were not afraid of a one-year commitment – it’s not marriage, after all, and we can bail out. Still, it felt giddy and cute as a honeymoon.





CHAPTER XVIII A Flat Furnished by a Village


From the old saying “It takes a village to raise a child” we can extrapolate another nugget of wisdom. It probably takes a village to do just about anything. In this case, it started with Mrs L (Bp) asking if I had a lot to bring to my new and empty flat. I said I had almost nothing – clothes and food, no furniture. There was a moment of surprise, and she asked if I wanted some bookshelves. I said this was more important than a bed. Her people brought shelves the next day. That’s when I turned to the ever-trusty Women of Budapest and posted the following:

MAY I REMOVE YOUR RUBBISH?

That’s a joke. But the real news is that after spending most of the last four years here, in a month-by-month way, I now move into a new flat with a lease of one year. It was a commitment! It’s also an almost totally empty flat, and I need everything.



QUESTION – DO YOU WANT TO THROW AWAY:

Little kitchen things? Anything, I haven’t a spoon.

Towels, sheets, blanket or duvet? Rug, curtains, tablecloth?

Folding chairs, table, desk, lamps? Stepladder, tools?

Bookshelves, books, anything to do with books?



If yes, I’ll come to you, in whatever socially distant and safe way you like. In any case, please wish me luck in this new phase of my life! Thank you, my neighbours.

My heavens, what a wonderful response poured forth within minutes! There were lots of people with clutter, happy to have me show up and drag it away. Oh, for my old van to be with me again! Times like these I missed it like a friend, and a good, strong, reliable friend at that.

These nice messages were filled with photos of household objects and furniture. I made selections and arrangements to meet. I went to all sorts of unknown areas of the city, rode on unknown trams and trolley-buses, met all kinds of smart, interesting women with cluttered homes and bags of stuff near the front door, and we helped each other out. Every evening or so, I went out with a light, empty suitcase and rucksack, and returned happy and heavily laden.

There was an extraordinarily fine set of rivet-less kitchen knives, the kind I’ve been longing for, and sturdy chairs, left out in a leafy courtyard by a generous lady who gave me the code to the gate, since she was out.

One lady offered pretty lemon-themed mugs, super nice textiles, my first warm blanket, and the offer that I could phone if I had questions about the city. In fact, every single one of them offered this. They came from every corner of the globe, and they all pitched in. They all admitted that they could only trim down if someone came to them and took it away. I was that someone, they were thankful too, and here was my village.

Mr C and I went somewhere near Keleti station, where a cute couple brought downstairs a desk, many storage bins and a microwave. While waiting, I couldn’t help but notice a scene on the busy, multi-lane boulevard. A guy in a wheelchair was in the second lane for cars, trying to get through the intersection. A bus was guarding him, blocking others from passing, holding up hooting traffic and taking myriad verbal abuse, but protecting him, nonetheless. The bus driver looked compassionate, patient and certain. The wheelchair guy looked strong, filthy, shirtless, ornery, foul-mouthed, aggressive and possibly not living in this orbit.

Our cabbie was sweet. He saw my happy excitement about the new place, and he got happy by contagion. We said we liked the music he was playing in his cab, and he sprang into life. He loved flamenco, he said passionately. In his taxi, only flamenco! He spoke like a man in love, angry when jealous, joyous to the point of euphoria. He helped carry the desk.

Next, there was an interpreter who had lived everywhere and had many things from many places, vibrantly colourful and stuffed into every centimetre. Her cat and dog loved me, which was the seal of approval. I left with lamps, drinking glasses, plates and many kitchen gadgets. She wanted to live by the sea, and I wished her good fortune in reaching that shore.

One door had an unfair number of screaming kids behind it. Their valiant mum only dared open that door slightly. She spoke cordially to me, alternating this with screaming at them, and she managed to hand me two massive bags of excellent textiles and cushy towels. She could only call “Sorry”, slam the door and return to the fray. Someday I’ll buy her a beer. Maybe when the kids are teens?

One whole family was returning to Australia, after a long time here in a large house. The contents were all over the lawn. The mother did the hard sell admirably, really tried to stuff my suitcase and backpack to the very gills. I took as much as I could carry, and it was a long walk ahead. Loads of textiles, an unexpected hair dryer, an eccentric salad spinner, a torch, a cute vase.

To bookend my original request, I then posted photos of the empty kitchen before, and the filled one after. The village embraced this thank you message. I know it’s not really my city, the way it is for the native-born. But this was my bid to be, in the spirit of the flat’s sub-letting rules, an acceptable long-term visitor – perhaps even a sort of conveniently distant cousin.

As for furnishings, there wasn’t much left to procure. For a new bed and more, a gay boyfriend agreed to come with me to IKEA – if you’re not a real couple, these places are fine. Then Mr C and a pal assembled several key things before a nice big dinner with all key helpers.

From Vienna came congratulations from Andreas, who recalled trying to find furniture on the street to furnish a flat after the war when Budapest was mostly in ruins. He said we did it more elegantly.

I put my name on the post box, and on the front bell. This felt wonderful.

In a fit of optimism, I got a spare mattress in the hopes of having guests someday. Vera and Andi would be first, I reckoned. We all enjoyed their visit last time. It would have to wistfully wait.



This is the letter I never sent my neighbours, and possibly never will:

Hi, I am your new neighbour.

My name is Kardos Eileen. I am new here.

Sorry, I do not speak Hungarian – only English. (I am a very slow beginner student.)

This letter was made on translate.google.com, so, I am sorry if it is terrible.

I am quiet and intend to be a good neighbour. If it’s OK with everyone, I’d like to add some flowers to the garden (and climbing beans up the fence, maybe? If allowed?).

Almost none of them ever looked at me, so maybe later.



There were only two downsides here that I could see. There was not much spying potential. There was a balcony, but it was low and protruding, much too visible. It was not the same as at my previous flat, but I’d have a try. I could get sunshine, which was heavenly.

I missed the old, serviced apartment, with 24/7 reception, nice people with good English, the ones who vowed to take me to the doctor at 3am if needed, those fantasy people. One can only continue the search. Elders living alone, beware, then build your village. This is my advice, which you didn’t ask for.

But, I have a new HAFH, and I still wish that worked as an acronym for one’s Home Away From Home when said out loud. Is HAH any better? No. Research must continue on that one, too.

I even had a microwave now, possibly a lifetime first.

The new flat changed my whole feeling of being here. It was not the plan, but it was a plan. There were doubts and questions galore. But occasionally, something falls out of the sky, right into your path, and there’s just no reason to say No to it. In such moments one must say Yes.

On Thursday, 18 June 2020, things changed. My status changed and the earth moved. I was an upgraded senior now – officially not a visitor but a resident. I couldn’t find a base in the UK, but a base found me, here, and I was astonished. It was symbolically mind-blowing.

It may not work for long. But for now, here I am.





JULY


Local Heroes





CHAPTER XIX At Home, at Last


July 2020, Week 1, Budapest


It was time to meet the infamous Hungarian bureaucracy. I had to register my new address at my local district XIII government office. Covid had changed office hours, so new availability of appointments or indeed any information ranged from scant to mysterious. Rules changed daily. Websites and phone numbers were useless. It was time to go in person to their office, a morning’s excursion. In person, one could, with luck, get real information, even book an appointment – and, in my case, also book myself a translator (as they had none). This was the plan. Of course by now I knew “plan” meant “cynical tragi-comedy”. Yet optimism refused to die, in the spirit of daisies forever pushing through concrete toward light.

It was an extraordinary struggle to simply stand at a bus stop and keep people two metres away. Although there was plenty of room, people approached and stood close. I moved away and they glared. This happened many times. Today, two people followed me – and glared! I glared back and moved yet again. The fear and frustration of the pandemic was turning people into angry caged animals.

All I learned at the government office was that it was closed until further notice. We were to go to the website which of course was not functioning. I dodged a steady stream of hostile pedestrians on the return journey and wanted to cry when I got home.

When aggrieved, I get busy with practical things, simple tasks. The next few days I made a set of spare keys and took them to the trusted Mr Cs. I procured a stepladder that fit into a big taxi for the lovely high ceilings here. Soon there would be lightbulbs in all those high empty sockets. I’d learn to skip around Street Grumpies to reach goals like keys and ladders.

On my first night in the new home, I did not sleep well, which can change the fortunes of the whole of the next day. I woke up repeatedly, with no idea where I was, then remembered, fell back to sleep, and so on, dozens of times. It’s natural at first in a new place.

Also, I have to admit, in general I often wake up with no idea where I am, more often than not. That evolved into a daily game maybe twenty to thirty years ago. Before really listening or opening my eyes, I played a guessing game: Where The Heck Am I? It involved Q&A like: Which decade is this? What’s my name? How old am I this time? Do these eye-cover things slide up to open, by any chance? They’re called eyelids? What’s out there? and so on.

It was like Dorothy first emerging from the wreckage of her house after crash-landing in Oz, but this time she had learning difficulties. In fact, in general, life seemed more and more like that.

It was extraordinarily quiet here! In the old place, every night was a parade of noisy drunks, arguing gangs, boy-racers screeching their tyres to the maximum. Here, most intersections had speed bumps, and everyone seemed to know. Retail shops closed late afternoon, and most eateries too. The sudden silence was almost spooky. Soon, it was sacred.

I sent photos to Cousin Vera, and she replied in her typically warm, mischief-making way, in her creative English (her fourth and newest language). “Hello! Congratulations! The apartment looks very nice. How old is it, about 100–130 years? It looks good bourgeois. Who has lived there?” I was glad she asked that. Later I learned that it had belonged to an old Jewish lady who’d lived there since the Second World War. I saluted her memory, thought of her sometimes when padding around, promised to look after the place. I decided to nickname her Rose. There was a particular corner in the kitchen where I sat, and I felt she must have sat here too, for years. Best seat in the house.

Vera was the one who taught me the new word Boho, meaning Bourgeois Bohemian, which became a running joke.

For example, another flirtatious feature of the flat was its washing machine. I haven’t had one of these in a very long time. It had been so long I gave up on the idea. Now though, I no longer had to launder things in the shower or a bucket. I bought enough celebratory T-shirts and underwear for a whole week from the friendly local Vietnamese shopkeepers who practised their English on me. Indeed, this was proper bourgeois. I was flirting with Boho.

On the spying front, I wasn’t expecting much. However, the other night was an exception. This was not out the front window over the street, but out the kitchen window over the courtyard garden, the inner sanctum.

A tent appeared, square and open-sided, decorated in red and gold, with drapes, rugs and cushions. At dusk, four women appeared, dressed in those same colours. All four gowns were full and flowing to the ground, slit to mid-thigh, with an upstairs display of tiny straps and plenty of bare bosom and bare back.

The theme was red roses, both fresh and embroidered on tablecloths. The many red candles almost got out of hand, with all the billowy curtains blowing around.

They assumed nimble, calm lotus poses, with upturned hands on knees, eyes shut, silent. Later there was gentle conversation which faded into the night. The next day, it all vanished. I have no idea which spiritual, religious, cultish, philosophical or meditational or other sort of evening that was. But, whoever they were, they also worshipped chic fashion.

Is that Boho?

At any rate, it was a contrast to the old neighbourhood, with Mrs Drunk and Mr Mugger, but these scenes may or may not be representative.

Later, I finally spoke with another neighbour, dressed in subtler colours. She was shy about her English and reluctant to say much, but she smiled when I said I liked a quiet building, and I was a quiet neighbour. That’s when she offered to shake hands, and we even spoke a bit. Then, as happens with so many educated Hungarians, she relaxed and spoke English more elegantly than most native English speakers can.

Back in the flat, a practical problem was solved with flair. Air-flow here was extremely good, if shockingly noisy. With big windows open at opposite ends – whoosh! I almost had to hang on to something. It startled me with a shriek when the metal window-stop slap-banged the window frame. I jumped every time. Then I found a solution in the toy section of the nearby cheap-and-plastic housewares shop, run by the friendly Vietnamese family who now always said hello and went straight into English practice. They had a squeezy toy ball with a map of the world. I cut my way in via the North Pole, shoved it onto the metal window-stop protuberance and, hey presto: quiet windows! A genius solution.

A supermarket delivery arrived with a gift – a can of beer. I thought it was a mistake, but it was not. A sticker on the can said “Gift for you”, so I said, “Cheers!” Very nice it was too, a unique taste to me, somewhere between an ale and a light stout. This part of the world has endless varieties of hand-crafted drinks. As for the grocery service, this was only my second order and they were trying to charm me. Maybe the word is wooing. It might work. My third order will be with them, I decided. Seducers.

So, on the one hand, totally contrary to plan, I suddenly had a lovely, if temporary, base in Budapest. My dear Scotland would have to wait. Meanwhile, in Hungary, even with a nice new flat and quite a changed perspective, I had yet to deal with their (“unique”?) language, their medical system, or their bureaucracy which is complex, infamous and loathed. So, whether or not this was my “forever-home”, retirement place or burial ground was yet to be determined. Health care was likely to tip the balance, but I was hoping not yet.





CHAPTER XX Lucky District XIII


The Rest of July, Budapest


After I put my name on the outside buzzer and on the post box to prove I really lived in this apartment, I ordered the first book to be delivered here in a mini-ceremony. The book was a memoir by one of my high school history teachers and a mentor hero, Joel Glazer. I wanted his story to be the first parcel to arrive at my new address.

He was an excellent teacher, unafraid of being different. A strong defender of civil rights, he defended underdogs and shone a light on unsung heroes. He encouraged intelligent debate and good behaviour. His wacky sense of humour was always available, and he spoke from the heart. He was smart and kept his facts straight. His recent birthday was celebrated by many, many ex-students. He admitted he was over seventy but gave no further details, other than mentioning a sixty-year career.

Here’s part of what I wrote to him in an email:

I read your book and really enjoyed it – some of it is so moving. Plenty is smart and funny and that’s not surprising.

In the postage stamp chapter, I was so glad to see Wallenberg in there. He is a great hero of mine. I now live near a street named after him. You’ll know about all the property he helped buy, via the Swedish Embassy, to create safe houses for people hiding from Nazis. These had fake front signs saying Swedish Red Cross or Swedish Kindergarten. They concealed residences packed with people hiding. Our cousin Jolan was there.

Jolan survived, so did her nephew Andreas. I went to his 90th birthday dinner last year. I’m pals with his daughter and this whole branch. It’s all good.

It was better than good, it was amazing. Even miraculous, in terms of sheer odds.

A fellow student had clued me into Mr Glazer’s upcoming birthday, and that he loved hearing from former students – in fact, his work email was on the cover of the book and was entirely public. I instigated our home town and other alumni to love-bomb him with messages. He thoroughly enjoyed this and so did we. It’s a special and deep pleasure to thank a mentor and teacher.

He wrote back, “I have made reference to you in many of my classes. I said that you were one of a kind. I told the story of you and the game of Diplomacy I hope you remember. It was a classic.”

I replied, “I recall the game simulated a fictitious war, using a map of Europe. We made alliances, backstabbed, attacked, invaded, etc. Our team did well but I walked off, didn’t finish. I didn’t enjoy those tactics. I didn’t want to win that way. But I enjoyed doing a whole comic strip, summing it up! Am I remembering this correctly?”

“Yes, you got it right,” he recalled. “In the many years that I have played the game, I have never had another student who was so good at the game who walked away because she did not like the principles of the game.”

Please forgive the brag. I preferred my “Postmaster General protest” story:

One of my high school pals tired of Mr Glazer’s challenging innovations, and asked for a break. Most of us loved what he did, encouraging debate and openness to new ideas. But, just for once, she wanted a traditional, conventional, factual test – something predictable. He arranged this right away. We had to list all the US presidents in order. Then we had to choose three of them and name three of their foreign policies. This was fine with her. With others, the outcry was strong and hilarious.

With any of what I called Long List tests, I had a routine. I studied ahead. I studied intensely the night before and the morning of a test. I usually did OK or even well and promptly forgot it all within minutes, unless there was actually a reason to remember. So, much of this effort was useless. I think that was part of my objection.

However, it was also fun to find a humorous way to protest. I needed to prove I could memorise a list of names, in the short term, for no reason, and with no lasting results or purpose. Therefore I researched and memorised all the key US Postmaster Generals.

I studied fiercely all week! I breezed the test, finished early and brought Mr Glazer my paper. He very quickly saw what it was. He smiled hugely and gave me A+++++, the best grade I ever got.

A witty protest is a thing of beauty. This is why I am in awestruck admiration of the great comedians and satirists. But everyone has their inspirational heroes. Some houses have Jesus. Vera read Mao. I gazed up at an image of Lenny Bruce.

That is a very different matter from admiring Wallenberg. He literally saved thousands of lives. Comedians lift the spirit – maybe no small thing either. And, some of them shine a wise light on the truth. If ever there could be someone who did both, they would be my greatest hero.



In my new neighbourhood, every day I walked past former safehouses, Wallenberg street, statues and plaques. Raoul Wallenberg’s heroism and martyrdom were celebrated the world over, but I only learned about him a few years ago. Now he was a major inspiration, and I recommended his story to anyone. He was a puzzling character, eccentric, but devoted and fearless. He paid a hideous price but rescued an estimated 100,000 people about to be killed by the Nazis.

As a Swedish diplomat in Budapest, he and his team created thousands of life-saving identity cards (Jolan had one), created Swedish Embassy annexes as safehouses (Jolan was in one), literally pulled people out of train stations as they were headed toward cattle-cars destined for death camps, and accomplished many more brave and astonishing feats.

My cousins were confused about one thing. At the start of Wallenberg’s operation, you had to have some kind of Swedish connection to enjoy these privileges, like new identity papers. The cousins could not think of any Swedish connection among our relatives, but my research uncovered a whopper.

It started with our Granddad’s brother Markus – an electrical engineer whose company helped construct the electrical infrastructure in north Budapest and Obuda in the early 1900s. His wife’s sister, named Gabriella, married the Chinese ambassador to Sweden. I had to read that twice, the very first time. It gets better: Gabriella and the Chinese ambassador to Sweden had a son called Gabriel (named after her), who in turn married a Swedish countess, who after a few kids and a divorce later collected a second husband who was a Swedish prince and second in line to the throne. Yes, we are so many short steps from the King of Sweden – if you stretch the idea of such steps.

Also, after the ambassador died, Gabriella married a wealthy Swedish businessman. Surely there were enough Swedish connections to help Jolan and perhaps others. It’s possible her Uncle Rudy (Rezso) and Aunt Aranka got identity cards as well.

There are many people who feel a great debt of gratitude to Raoul Wallenberg and his team.



Back in my easier life, Grid Walks resumed in their new setting, although they were not as systematic. They now sprouted zigzagging or random versions. I needed exercise and to explore the new hood, and I was saving my first official walk along the Danube for a special time – because to me, it was more of an iconic Walk Along The Danube.

The Vienna cousins always laughed about this. I assumed before, quite wrongly, that in Vienna, the Danube was a big deal, a national treasure, a patriotic symbol of the homeland and its daily bread, a perpetual waltz. This is not so. It sneaked evasively around the outskirts of the city; the canals were a lot more popular and fun, and just because Strauss wrote a waltz called “The Blue Danube” does not mean anything. Of course, it’s brown. And no one is dancing to it.

But, in Budapest, they are dancing to it, in their way. They swoon over the Danube, and I do too. Here, the Danube is at the heart of things, both emotionally and topographically. It is a magnificent stretch of that great river. That was why I’d decided to schedule my first promenade there somewhat ritualistically.





Local Heroes


Some streets were named after writers I’d heard of: Balzac, Hugo, Gogol. There were also local heroes I’d never heard of. After passing these names a few dozen times, the following shows what thirty seconds of crude research can reveal about important lives.





Jozsef Katona (1791–1830)


He was a poet, playwright and actor, but started out as a lawyer. It’s sad to say he only enjoyed a short life, dying before he was forty. After a satisfying rise, his career faltered later on. He adapted some German melodramas, and was rumoured to have died of a broken heart, in love with an actress who did not reciprocate his affection.





Gyula Hegedus (1870–1931)


This was an actor who seems to have done everything that can be done in the theatre. He enjoyed a wide, artful career full of praise and warm admiration, and was a key member of not just the Hungarian National Theatre but the whole development of the national theatre scene over several decades.





Miklos Radnoti (1909–1944)


This story was the most moving of all. Radnoti is generally considered one of the greatest of Hungary’s poets in the twentieth century, known for seven volumes of poetry, including love poems to his wife. He is also considered one of the most important poets to bear witness to the Holocaust. He was born here in district XIII. At his birth, his twin brother died, as did his mother, and his father died when he was twelve, leaving him to be supported by his late dad’s former employer.

As a Jew (despite converting to Catholicism), he was drafted three times into forced labour, one of the harshest forms of slave labour. The last time was in 1944, in the copper mines of Yugoslavia. As the Soviet Army advanced, his group of prisoners was forced to march in retreat. Weak from hunger and torture, he and others collapsed, were shot and thrown into a mass grave.

However, miraculously, his story does not end there. That mass grave was dug up and exhumed a year later. A small notebook was discovered, containing his final poems, which his widow arranged to have published after his death, to great acclaim.





Jane Haining (1897–1944)


This Scottish lady emigrated to Hungary and became the matron of the Girls’ Home of the Scottish Mission of Budapest. She worked there for twelve years, responsible for about 400 children aged six to sixteen. When the Nazis moved into the city, and their Jewish students were at risk, she was advised to return home to Scotland, but she could not abandon the girls. Like them, she was sent to die at Auschwitz for the crime of protecting them.

She was recognised by Yad Vashem, the World Holocaust Remembrance Centre in Jerusalem, as one of the Righteous Among Nations, and is honoured there as someone who risked her life to save others. She is also honoured at the school, which still exists on Vorosmarty street. And she is a local hero, in her native Scotland, to the congregation of the church where she first started out.

My great-grandparents Sarolta and Lipot Kardos lived on Vorosmarty street, nearby that mission, but it was long before Jane’s time there. Still, our people were all over that area for decades, and so was the Scottish Mission in Budapest, founded in the 1840s, so I reckon the mission people probably passed a Kardos every day.



In the Second World War, the XIII was a neighbourhood where many buildings hid people hiding from the Nazis. Its nickname was the International Ghetto. There were several plaques explaining which brave embassies were involved. Our cousin Jolan hid there, unaware that her sister Lily had died in Auschwitz. Lily’s son Andreas, a teen, was with his dad. He wrote:

In Dachau, my stepfather and I often spoke of Jolan. He said, “Nothing will happen to her, she is clever and cautious, and if nothing else can be done, she will hide in the basement under the coal, and will survive.”

Jolan did survive. After the war, she returned to her flat on Barat street in the VIII not far from Keleti station. She found a family squatting there, but managed to get inside. They would not leave, so they all lived together – four in one room – in her small studio flat, which doubled as her music studio. Then teenage Andreas showed up, her nephew, straight from Dachau, orphaned, and she was about to become his new mother. At first, he didn’t want to crowd them. But Jolan insisted – because that was exactly what might drive the squatters out. It worked. The family left. Then it was just the two of them for a while, unrolling mats at night to sleep with their legs under the piano.

Later, he escaped to Vienna, started an academic career and a family. Much later, his daughter Vera took the train to Budapest to visit Aunt Jolan – and also to sleep under the piano. Even later still, when he was in his late eighties, thanks to the encouragement of his home city’s municipality publishing a local history magazine series, Andreas published the first few chapters of his memoirs. That’s how I found him. Thank goodness he left a trail. It’s part of my trail now too.

We’ve had countless visits and chats now. A few still remark how in certain moments, from certain angles, I remind them of Jolan. Andreas once cried out, “That’s it! It’s the hair, the way you push the hair up, off the forehead!” In that split second, warm memories passed over his face. I was not there, and instead, he caught a glimpse of his Aunt Jolan, who took him in after the war, who taught local kids about Beethoven and toilet paper, whose career was wrecked because she was Jewish, who had a certain way of pushing her wavy hair off the side of her forehead.

In dark moments, heroes are our beacons.



Finally, it felt like the right evening to stroll over the river and say hello, as a new resident, as a formal greeting to the great Danube. As I walked to the riverbank, I thought about all our people who lived around here in the past. Also, as usual, I liked trying to picture them, arranged in an old-style, sepia-tinted photograph.

Quite a few of our cousins were here during the war, and between twenty and thirty of them are still on our Unaccounted For List. In such cases, of which there are tens of thousands if not more, the probability is they were shot into the river, or shot in the street and buried in a huge mass grave, of which there are several in this city alone.

I don’t fully understand why all this entered my mind on my first stroll to the river, but I was in tears by the time I got there. I had no idea that, until now, what I’d been putting off and waiting for was the right moment to visit yet another cemetery.

I went and paid my respects at the riverside





CHAPTER XXI Decision-Making and Other Hallucinations


The Covid Era made me indecisive, and I didn’t like that. I love an informed decision and they were in short supply, just not the fashion these days. There’s always a point in believing in dreams, but right now, perhaps not decisions or plans.

Back in February, at the start of the Covid Era, we didn’t know that’s what it was. My decision to leave Thailand, despite being urged to fly nowhere, was smart and mostly lucky. I wanted to see friends and family, and had a strong instinct that I should move as soon as possible or be trapped. The timing was fortunate.

After that, my decision to stay in Hungary was semi-forced but acceptable. True, the UK government was bombarding me with messages to “come home, you fool”, but they were talking about people who actually had a home waiting for them there, which I did not. No UK hotel or rental agent could or should have taken me out of the blue, not just then.

As for health care, was I safer there? Not at the moment. Things weighed out the same. I had EU health cover until the end of the year, even if a friend had to come to translate – a scenario I did not relish and knew all too well. But this was unlikely. I listened to scientists and epidemiologists, most of whom said we should stay where we were, if we could. My instincts said the same thing. So, I stayed where I was.

Normally – or rather, in previous years – around this time, I’d be deciding and planning when to return to Thailand. As it was, I couldn’t decide or plan much of anything, certainly not my large and stupid agenda. I was dazzled by the people who were doing degrees, learning musical instruments, working harder and being more productive than ever, some with a very full-time job and a family. I admired and envied these super heroes. I decided to make a mistake I’ve made many times in my silly workaholic career.

Between the ages of twenty and about forty, I could work full-time, have a weekend job too, and go out nearly every night either socialising or to an evening class. These days are over. I kept forgetting this. And yet, I worked and wrote a book, so why chide myself for not doing “more”? How ironic, that blindness was a major theme of 2020. Perfect vision was the last thing I felt.

It was a while before I realised I should institute a new low bar: stay employed, shower daily, eat OK, keep a diary, trouble no one, survive – and do not panic. That was plenty to accomplish in those first few months.

I still had trouble deciding what to do about the online Hungarian course, which was driving me miserable and was simply one thing too many, especially with a lack of audio materials and I needed those like oxygen. I knew I had to quit and yet could not decide.

Occasionally, when I am overwhelmed with a billion details and no ability to prioritise them, I go in circles like a goldfish that doesn’t know it’s a goldfish and also has no idea someone has put speed in the water. To break that spin, a game often helps. The right game can be a sanity-saver.





Decision-Making Games


The Nine-Way Priority Game


Here, you divide all tasks into nine categories. Ask yourself: Does this need doing:

1.This minute; this hour; this afternoon?

2.Today; the day after; this week?

3.This month; this season; this year?

You can raise the stakes. What will you do:

4.Today; this week; this month?

5.This season; this year; this decade?

6.This lifetime; your legacy; eternity?

Obviously, that can be a bit much. But in a pinch, if you’re paralysed, it can tip the balance, induce some movement. Or nausea. It can stop you rearranging your sock drawer for days rather than doing something more important that you’re avoiding. It can clear the fog. A path might appear. Step by step.

Here I needed something direct. People with families have extremely clear priorities, obviously enough. Many decisions are already made. Their legacy is assured. We singles must find our equivalents. As for decisions when there’s no partner, and friends are busy, then you bounce your ideas off the walls like one-person handball.





The Needle Test


Historically, this was my quickest ever decision and very effective. It occurred long ago in a hospital emergency room. I was in transit, but not sure where I was moving to next. I had two job offers, in Canada and Israel, and I was drowning in indecision. The nice guy drawing blood listened to my confused story and shortened the whole process.

“You need one good gut instinct,” he advised. I agreed. He said, “Try this. Shut your eyes. I’ll ask you a question. Answer instantly – no waiting, no thinking – just automatically spew out the first thing. OK?”

“OK.” I shut my eyes.

He asked, “Where would you rather live: Canada or Israel?”

Bang! In went the needle.

“Israel!” I yelped, before I knew it.

“There you are,” he shrugged. “If I were you, that’s where I’d go.”

So I did. It made sense. With a sudden or unexpected question – this time with added impact – your first and fastest answer is the most honest. I went to Israel for two years, which was quite an adventure and a story for another time.

Let me close with paraphrasing advice from cartoon genius Dr Peabody: the way to find a needle in a haystack is to sit in the haystack.





One Year Left to Live, a Classic


More recently, floundering around in a maze in the fog, this showed me the escape route. In this scenario, you get perfect health and mobility and even money, but only for one year.

Will you live differently from how you do now?

Yes!

Will you study a foreign language or nine of them?

Not for one damned second. Enough of that.

For starters, I’d finish this book, try to write another, and write as many letters, thank you notes, friendship and love notes as I possibly could. Sweet keepsakes to leave behind. This travel series is a sort of public version of all that. Of course, I’d also be phoning and video-calling all over the place. But as for things to leave behind, what I wish to leave behind is a stack of books, full of adventure stories plus some silly ones.





The Obituary Test


This can be the clincher. How would you most like to be remembered?

“She spoke ten languages, all badly, and devoted a lot of her life to this.”

I rested my case, quit the online language studies, and threw myself full pelt into a combination of book and letter writing, plus more chat. It may look suspiciously like a decision, but really it was following a dream.

As for anything else beyond that – and showering, etc. – it was time to quote Bart Simpson: I can’t promise to try, but I can promise to try to try.





AUGUST


A Trip to Grandma’s





CHAPTER XXII Day One – Detective Work


August 2020, North-eastern Hungary


Finally, it was time to delve more deeply into Grandma Anna’s side of the story. Before any family-tree research could continue, there was an embarrassment to face. I had to reckon with getting our surname wrong, and how basic is that? Name-changing is a constant challenge for anyone looking into these things. I had no idea the extent or depth or nuisance of it.



Some of Anna’s earliest documents in the USA listed her maiden name as Horcsik (“HER-chick”), but later always as Dudas (“DU-dash”). I never understood this. But, here in this small rural registry office, it was clear to see. There were many, many Horcsiks, often with a second name – not exactly a nickname or middle name, but a sort of second surname, to differentiate groups and sub-groups – to keep all those Horcsiks straight. There were P. Horcsiks and K. Horcsiks, whereas we were the D. (Dudas) Horcsiks.

In the USA, it looked like Anna used her real maiden name at first. This was on the death document of her baby daughter Bertha, and two other early records. Maybe Horcsik was odd to write. It was spelled differently each time, once as Horcssj, and how would you even say that? Maybe she tried, but switched to Dudas which was easier. It’s both plausible and typical of those times. If so, for the last four years, I’ve been looking everywhere under the wrong name.

Which name did she sail under? We did more digging, and no relevant Horcsiks appeared. But, from earlier digs, there was one record of a teenage Anna Dudas emigrating from Hungary’s northeast, sailing in early 1905. No one else on record came close to fitting the bill, but these details fit. If this was her, what was she doing for three years, between then and the arrival of her first son, our Uncle Bela turned Albert, born in 1908?

I wish I could find any marriage documentation for Anna and Eugene. I have tried and tried. Unfortunately, many records in New York from that time were destroyed by fire, flood or administrative chaos, or they were never kept in the first place. We know neither when nor where (nor even if?) they got married. As a Catholic and a Jew, maybe they quietly went out of state? Only a mischief-monkey would suggest they didn’t marry but said they did.

I want this gossip, but it won’t come out to play.



A sad story got turned around.

We didn’t know much about Anna, let alone her parents or anyone else. We knew she was a twin. Anna and Julia were born together and baptised together, but this was all we knew. Overall, this line has lots of twins. All pregnant Kardos women (by birth or by marriage) are more than nervously aware of this fact.

Another birth record showed that the twins had a younger brother Istvan (Steven), younger by five years. Of our very few ancestral photos, there was one special formal one, which we assume was of the parents and young Istvan. The lack of labelling of this photo is a sadness, but this trio is probably them. The stern, moustachioed father was seated. The wife in a headscarf and full skirt stood to one side, a dutiful hand on his shoulder. On the other side, slightly behind his dad, stood an awkward teenage boy, no more than fifteen, at a guess.

This photo suggested no other siblings, a discouraging hint. Where was Anna’s twin, Julia – and were they identical? Did Julia emigrate somewhere too? Or was she nearby and married and in her own house, and at that time, a married daughter did not customarily join a family portrait with the parents?

Questions are like mushrooms. So is speculation.

Although obviously these were rural people, they were not so terribly poor. The terribly poor wouldn’t be photographed much, if at all. Not everyone could travel to the city – by horse and trap, I suppose – and pay a photographer like this. Also, both men had excellent high boots, and Istvan Jr sported an elaborately and beautifully embroidered jacket for the occasion. So, these three enjoyed a few niceties. They appeared humble but in no way desperate.

Istvan was about ten when big sister Anna left for New York in about 1905. We were to soon learn that he died of typhus about five years later. The photo must have been taken shortly before he died, possibly sent to her shortly after. By then, she was Mrs Eugene Kardos, about twenty years old with her first baby, when she got the news that her younger brother had died of typhus. Her last image of him would be the photo of the shy, awkward boy in the photo with his parents.

His last image of her might have been as a tough, sturdy teen with gumption, a boat ticket and not much more. She was probably never seen again by family in Hungary.

So far, we knew of three siblings: Anna who went to New York, her twin Julia who was a mystery, and young Istvan who died a teen. I wanted there to be others, but suspected there weren’t any.

Fortunately, this was wrong.

It was time to explore Grandma’s neck of the woods.



It took us a morning to drive from Budapest to the small village of Fuzerradvany, or Radvany for short. In fact, there are a few villages called Radvany, but this was Anna’s birthplace, near the current border with Slovakia, in the Hungarian northeast. Us in this case meant myself plus Karesz, the historian, tour guide and genealogy researcher who has helped a lot in the past. He researched Dad’s dad’s side of the tree, quite thoroughly, which felt like a cast of thousands. Now it was Dad’s mom’s turn. If we could find anything.



The sunflower fields were covered with half-browned, bowed heads. There were fields of rapeseed (please can we rename that?) and corn was everywhere. Apples and apricots too. Peaches were especially wonderful this time of year. These are Hungary’s great plains, perfect for farming, surrounded by distant hills that are almost mountains but gentler, with plenty of wildflowers everywhere.

Preparing for this trip, what came to light were birth records confirming a total of five children, not just three! This delight quickly turned to horror. First of all, one of the newly discovered siblings was a baby who lived barely a week, a few years before the twins were born. This baby was named Istvan: later the brother who died as a teen was named after the late infant. This was the custom. If a baby named Istvan died, the next boy took that name. At least our second Istvan survived more than a week.

The worst news involved the other newly discovered sister, Maria, about six years older than the twins. Sometimes one doesn’t see certain tragedies until you’ve studied the figures many times. Suddenly a link between two facts can leap out and sting. Anna’s twin Julia and older sister Maria died on exactly the same day, aged nine and fifteen. Their death documents revealed that the cause of death was smoke inhalation. They died in a fire at the family home in Radvany, in August 1898.

Of the five siblings, two died young of natural causes, two died young in the same fire, and one left home forever. These poor parents deserved at least one offspring who survived, stayed nearby, and comforted them, at least for a while.

We went in search.



Anna’s dad, Istvan Dudas Horcsik, Sr, died first of the couple. He died at home, aged fifty-eight, in 1918 of that year’s flu pandemic. He was a soldier. His death was reported by his widow Maria, born Fisser. She died a few years later in 1921 of TB.

The person who reported her death was a Mrs Janos Hutka. This could be a married daughter. It could also be a neighbour. It could be anyone. We needed more proof, and it was annoyingly hard to follow because there was no first name or maiden name, Janos being her husband’s name. This happened all the time and it drove me crazy. But we had a clue.



The next stop was the village cemetery, which provided an exciting thrill, and how often in a lifetime can anyone say that? It was small, neat and well cared for. This was in contrast to many of the big city cemeteries, so huge they’re hard to maintain, and sometimes too overgrown to see anything. Here we could check every plot in an hour. A lane divided the Catholics (crosses everywhere, very decorative) and Calvinists (or Hungarian Reformed – fewer crosses, more goblets, everything simpler).

Unusually, the first thing we saw was what we were hoping for. Just inside the entrance, a few steps in, near the front corner, we immediately stumbled over the grave marker for Anna’s brother Istvan, the one in the photo. We really jumped!

Istvan’s marker was a metal tower with a risen Jesus on one side and wings welded to the back, though two sections had snapped off and were placed loosely at the base. The immediate area was just grassed-over lawn, some distance from any neighbouring graves, suggesting the rest of the family were buried here, but most traces were gone except for two old wooden crosses, without words or markings.

Here’s where our discovery pounced: on Istvan’s round plaque was an inscription (slightly misspelled, by the way), which said he was missed by his siblings.

Siblings – plural! Anna had at least one surviving sibling! Here’s the full inscription:

Here lies Istvan Dudas Horcsik.

Born 1894, died 1909.

You lived your earthly happiness for a short time.

Rest in peace.

You are cried for, by your parents and siblings.

Peace on your ashes.

The unattached plaque was exactly what often gets stolen for scrap metal. We agreed it would be worth repairing, and we’d find out how that could be done.

Anna had another sibling, for sure! They were not five, but six. Whoever this new sibling was, did she marry Janos Hutka? We went Hutka-hunting.

The next gravestone was a Kardos, by the way, Granddad’s surname and mine, so that made us jump again. But in Hungary, the name Kardos is like Smith. They’re everywhere and these were not ours, or anyway not close ones. Still, a Kardos right next door was startling.

The hunt didn’t take long. There was indeed a Mrs Janos Hutka, but again no first or maiden name. If she was ours (as we needed to confirm), then she had a daughter, and that daughter in turn also had a daughter, according to the gravestones. That last one would be about my mother’s age, so if she had kids, they’d be my age group, and there could be living cousins.

Was this Hutka one of us?



In that area, between 1895 and 1907, there were five people who married a Hutka, and one of them was ours: Erzsebet Dudas Horcsik married Janos Hutka in 1905. She had the same parents as Anna, same town, same everything. This was her! Anna had a sister Erzsebet, about eight years older. She stayed in Hungary, in her home village all her life, always near her mother until the day she reported her mother’s death and then until her own.

Erzsebet and Janos’s marriage was around the same time that Anna left for New York, so we can’t be sure Anna was there for the wedding. By the time their mother died in 1921, Anna had been in New York City for some time. Her three American-born sons – Albert, Eddie and Alex (my dad) – were approaching their teens and did not speak a word of Hungarian, nor would they ever.



There were Hutkas about, and some of them were ours. The next step was clear. This was a tiny village, the kind of place where everybody knows everybody, where if you sneeze on this side of town, someone calls Bless You from the other side. Gossip ruled.

Right on cue, across the street from the cemetery entrance, appeared a woman in her driveway, opening a gate. You’re our girl, I thought. A middle-aged lady meant gossip potential, so said the cliché. She opened the gate to her husband arriving home on his motorbike, daughter on the back, both clad head to toe in leather, and all clichés vanished fairly soon. It turned out he was the gossip. He was happy to talk and talk.

They were happy to hear about our mission. Karesz explained that my grandmother was born here, that we sought living cousins, the whole spiel. I was used to his spiel. I almost felt I could follow it in Hungarian. They liked the project very much. The moment they heard the name Hutka, they smiled. The man said, Sure, he knew the name. Mrs Hutka used to live around the corner. She died last year and the house was still for sale, on the right, the yellow one. The sign in the window had a phone number for her daughter.

Her daughter would be my second cousin. She’d be about my age. My mouth had fallen open by then. Daddy Leather suggested we try that number. We most certainly did. We wasted no time, walked straight there and rang that number immediately.

While he did his spiel again on the phone, I admired the cute bungalow painted in cheerful yellow. Somebody loved gardening. There were flower pots and window boxes all around.

You never know how people will react to this kind of surprise. New Cousin and Husband agreed to meet us at the cemetery the next day. That was a fine day’s detective work, and it was only Day 1.





CHAPTER XXIII Day Two – Living Cousins!


Alcohol for breakfast? Never. I’d vomit within an hour and be grumpy with nausea for twenty-four. However, last night we downed drinks with the landlady of our current guesthouse and a man I assume was her father. Their palinka was homemade and very smooth. They poured generously and downed it in one. I sipped slowly. It was excellent. But when Dad Gnarly held out another glass the next morning at 8am, I went pale and politely declined. The offer was repeated firmly and I pleaded illness but he seemed insulted.

It was not the infamous English Offer, where ritualistically they must offer three times and you must say No twice before accepting. This was not that. This was simple vomit-avoidance on my part and a plain firm No. Unfortunately, there is a strong tradition here that it’s terribly rude to turn down the offer of a shot of palinka. There was no repairing this. The poor guy shrugged and frowned, and I could only slink away under his dark cloud.

We found a place for scrambled eggs, cute spicy sausages and fluffy crescent rolls. We had time before the cousinly meeting to photograph the town and visit churches, meaning the pretty old stone church where she was baptised, and the red-brick modern thing that held documents like her birth record.

We went to the latter first and, of course, no one was there. A schedule on the door suggested this priest visited a different area each day. Rural life. I almost thought we should chase after him, but later we learned he was on vacation all week. This would be pursued later by letter.

Grandma’s birth certificate would be needed if ever I wanted to apply for citizenship here, to honour Granddad and also to stay in the EU as a Brexit refugee. I doubted I could (or would ever seriously try to) pull my language skills up enough. But if I ever had a change of heart, I’d recall some of the advice I’ve heard from others who did this:

You only need to present one grandparent as the direct link, so choose a Christian one.

Also, say you are Christian as well, even if you are not. Just say it.



These were the words of calm well-wishers who were non-judgemental and just being practical. It may not matter. I probably will never qualify.



New Cousin and Husband met us at the cemetery. NC was shy and quiet but smiling, and Hub did most of the talking. They were sweet, hospitable and generous.

After the introductory spiel about our mutual family-tree branches, we went to our corner of the cemetery. They confirmed that the whole corner was this extended family, though the markers were gone. Before, there was a small fence around these and also five or ten more ancient graves.

Sweetly enough, whenever they came to bring flowers to and tend their people’s graves, they did that here too. This was despite the fact that they did not exactly know how these were relations of theirs, and I found that moving.

He also said he’d mend Istvan’s fallen plaque.

They asked more about how we found them, and we described the whole chain that led to the yellow house. They were amazed. What’s more, we were all amazed that the New York branch had no idea Anna had a sister back home, while back home in Hungary, her sister Erzsebet’s descendants had no idea about Anna and the rest of the New York chapter.

Absolutely no idea. Amazing and puzzling.

On another crazy front, what’s madly confusing with all such searching in this region, is that nearly all women were named Anna, Maria or Erzsebet with the occasional Julia. All the men were Janos, Istvan or Miklos, with the occasional Laszlo. This is confusing and I object. At least Jewish custom alternated generations, when taking each other’s names.



Back to our story: We wandered to the exit, and got to the topic of the fire or rather The Fire, meaning the shocking and horrifying1898 fire which killed two of Anna’s sisters, including her twin. Of course, our hosts knew all about it. In fact, when major renovations started on that property, Hub and his father-in-law dismantled some the undamaged materials in what I secretly, warmly felt was also our building, a little bit. They reclaimed everything they could, certainly all the big beautiful wooden beams, some still blackened. They used them to build an attractive old-style garage, across from the old yellow house.

I was touched by this story, and loved that the beams were used again.

This family bore a lot of grief.

They then explained that Gran’s childhood home, the site of that fire, was not far from here. It was still standing, most of it. Would we like to go and see?

I nearly shrieked. We went straight there.

The old homestead was just on the other side of town, the Old Town. It was a bit uphill, which I believe is a constant everywhere: early settlers snag uphill first. This had a charming view of green rolling hills and thick woods.

This was the “smallholding” I’d read about on the Dudas family documents. This couple actually owned this place and even a bit of land. He wasn’t as lowly as a tied servant or a tenant peasant, but life did not look easy, either. To me, this tallied with that photograph, where they looked like farmers, not serfs.

Today, the front of the house stood as a shell, windows knocked out. There were piles of sand, bricks and other building material lying all around. The front was quite narrow but it extended a long way back, on a very long, narrow strip of land.

Back then, they’d have been part of a shared situation. The long building was split into four or five small units with a family in each. Each family had a few plots here and also elsewhere, dotted around. Many tasks were done together, with several families combined.

Ours was the last unit at the back, so they saw lovely apple trees and foliage right out their back window, assuming they had one. There were other fruit trees, vegetable plots, barns and sheds for livestock – maybe some chickens, a cow or a goat? Maybe they fished, trapped things and shot game in the woods?

I stood near the fruit trees and pictured the house. I had an image of Anna as a teen, feeding chickens, picking fruit, probably always helping with the cooking because she cooked non-stop most of her life.

We drove to the yellow house and saw the handsome garage opposite, with big strong rough charred beams. To touch those beams from the scene of the tragedy was sad and dark, yet beautiful and marvellous.

Charred wood that’s still strong might describe our family tree.

We went inside for cool drinks, Q&A and photos, to draw – person by person – a new family chart. I had my laptop with more photos to compare. Some of the physical resemblances made us gasp.

We had so many questions. The chat flowed and flowed.

If the ship’s document I found is the right one, then Anna went not steerage but second class. Were they really prosperous enough to buy a better-than-average ticket? Seemed unlikely to me, but the others thought it possible. Hub pointed out that several million Hungarians made the same trip during those years, and there must have been ways to arrange it. It was common for the extended family and neighbourhood to collectively scrape together someone’s ticket money.

Another question: the two eldest daughters were both born before their parents were officially married. Surely this was controversial in a church-going community? I assume some people were hard on them. But, here the father’s name was on the birth record, so she was not a single mother in that sense. He was a soldier – a reservist. Perhaps he was away and back, away and back, then three pregnancies later they were married. He clearly stuck by her and was a proper dad to their brood, although four of the six died as kids, which I believe their neighbours were not cold about witnessing. Their tardy marriage ceremony may have been accepted, eventually. After all, the couple died close together, in their sixties.

By the way, it’s possible the reason he’s not buried with the others, is that he died as a soldier, in 1918, of the flu, so he probably died not at home but at the battlefront.



In the cellar, Hub showed me their massive and beautiful wooden wine barrels and a cold storage area on a pounded dirt floor, which got dampened and re-flattened every year.

NC showed me her late mother’s room, her religious art and some beautiful traditional embroidery. Her mother’s things were everywhere. She’d been described all afternoon as kind and good and generous and sweet. She only died late last year and was still deeply and sorely missed.

We wished we knew each other’s languages. NC overcame shyness and hugged me.



Hub recommended a local restaurant – the one where they had their wedding, so of course that’s where we went, and it was lovely. Tolgyfa (Oak Tree) had a big airy covered open porch, and served a game stew with curd-shaped nokedli noodles, all tender and flavourful, and a nice linden leaf wine, from the famous Tokaj wine region with its volcanically rich soil.



Not all questions were answered, but we knew what we were doing tomorrow. NC had a sister, Z, who lived not far away. She was on our route back to the city. Another phone call and another spiel later, and we had another afternoon date with another cousin. Tomorrow was looking promising.

But first, a detour to the late 1970s.





CHAPTER XXIV They Have a File on You: A Detour to the 1970s


Winter 1978, from Ohio to Budapest


I explained to the cousins that this was not my first trip to Hungary. That was long ago, as a nineteen-year-old undergraduate. In part, it happened by accident. A group of friends were flying to Europe on a low-budget airline. The plan was to arrive together, have some time in Paris as a group, split up for a bit in the middle, reconvene later in Paris and return to the States. Six weeks total, a remarkable splurge. The moral support of a group was exactly what I needed. I did not have the nerve to go on my own. I hadn’t been anywhere but had dreamed of travel since I could remember. Inspired by strength in numbers, I got my ticket. Then, no one else did. They all dropped out, apart from one other. This was not the plan.

At least I had one buddy on the flight, after which she disappeared with a boyfriend. I then discovered solo travel with a big backpack, sturdy boots, a long (later filthy) skirt and many sweaters (it was winter). I saw Paris and more, and ended up – as I’d dreamed – in Budapest, the old ancestral home. That whole trip was like magically entering a fascinating movie. A cool foreign movie with subtitles.

Instead of a hotel, I got a room in a private flat, via the one and only government agency. The flat was gorgeous, filled with many generations of antiques, art and unravelling textiles. The current owner was a rather camp single doctor, whose housekeeper looked after me – like a fierce and scary, but probably harmless, hawk.

It’s a testimony to her miming skills that she made it very clear to me that not only was my landlord not married, he was a gynaecologist who “only looked” at women but there were no women in his life. I only met him once, for less than a minute. He leaned his head in the doorway, welcomed me in perfect if theatrical English, explained that he was busy but she was my housekeeper. Then he left and I never saw him again.

The housekeeper was Hungarian, and also fluent in German, of which I understood very little, so to compensate for that she screamed at me in German. She was generous with breakfast, tyrannical about everything and had lots of laundry obsessions. The first few evenings, she forced me to smoke terrible, harsh cigarettes that looked like tar-sticks, after which I’d stagger nauseated to bed, hoping to keep my dinner down. After that, I never returned to the flat for a rest and a change of shirt before the evening meal. I trudged around exhausted from dawn to late evening, and always found an evening concert.

I saw a lot! That housekeeper drove me straight into the arms of high culture, although this was not difficult. My main undergrad studies were music and literature, so those were the magnets. There were superior concerts every single day. I took full advantage of the Liszt Academy’s student concerts, where my contemporaries showed their brilliance for no entrance fee. There were fantastic art museums and galleries, fascinating architecture, plus iconic bridges over a dramatic river. There was plenty about Budapest to make someone walk around for eighteen straight hours, even in harshest winter, especially if you’re nineteen, desperate to see the world and, until now, you haven’t seen much except New Jersey and Ohio.

One thing I didn’t do, and couldn’t even begin to imagine starting to do, was research my ancestry. I longed to, but there were a million obstacles. I emphasised to the cousins how much I wanted to. I said that with strong feeling. Then a funny thing happened. The two men, Karesz and Hub, looked at each other, had a quick exchange and started laughing. A flood of mirth ensued. There was so much I didn’t know, but they sure did. A goldmine spilled forth.

“Can you imagine, in 1970s Hungarian Communism, some student from an enemy nation goes to a government office and asks to see things?” Uproarious laughter.

“The police would be there immediately.” More laughter.

“Somewhere, there’s a file on her.”

“Of course there is!”

They’d both be surprised if there wasn’t. I’d never thought of it. I’ll bet they’re right. I rather liked the idea.

Today, one can request to see such files, and sometimes they are provided. I made a note to make such a request. They then talked about the surveillance mania in those years. Hub was older and remembered it all directly. His manner said that he’d damned well seen and heard plenty, and he spoke for many others. Karesz was a well-read historian. These two knew.

They and many others agree that during the 1970s, there was less alleged state torture and murder than in the 1950s, but there was a sharp rise in all manner of surveillance and restrictions on communications with the outside world.

As for asking to see state documents of a totalitarian Communist regime of this sort, it’s a good thing I was too ignorant to even try back in the 1970s. I do not know exactly what might have happened, but I’m sure it would have been scary.

And now, based on their observations and knowledge plus ruminations, there follows a hypothetical scenario, based on what was typical or even probable at the time.



Imagine that you and I and another colleague work as a trio for the Immigration Department. Into our dingy office on a Monday morning comes a superior who delivers our task, a stack of fresh files. These are all foreigners who recently entered the country. We check them, report on them and await further instructions. We work as a team of three because we always work as a team of three, meaning each of us reports separately to the boss to report on the other two.

(It’s time for that terrible but iconic joke: Why do KGB agents always go around in threes? One can read, one can write, one keeps an eye on the two intellectuals.)

We open the first file, and make the usual assessments.

From the USA? Not good.

University student? Definitely not good!

Single female? Travelling alone? That’s weird. This is 1978 – nobody does that.

Typically Hungarian last name? She wants a closer look. Maybe a room search?

(They’d only have found a backpack, dirty clothes and a book called Europe on $20 a Day. This was a lifeline and a bible before even thoughts of a digital age. That one book had to steer everything. No internet, no cell phones/mobiles/handies. Even a working phone booth was hard to find. Prehistoric.)

How do we find out more about this student who’s dropped from Mars? Follow her. Besides going to the usual historical and tourist sights, and eating an impressive five or six times a day, her programme is clearly to consume as much art and music as possible. Otherwise, what she does all day and every day is write in a small notebook. She does this more or less all the time, everywhere she goes. Scribble, scribble, scribble.

That is deeply suspicious. Very suspicious indeed.

We definitely need to talk to her.

Who can we get to befriend her? It must be someone fluent in English and there are very few of those. Someone her age? No, a bit older, a man, nice-looking if we know one. Do we know any charmers connected to a university? Music or art school, something like that?

Check the calendar. What artsy events are in the city this week? Look, there’s an exhibition all week at the College of Arts and Crafts. Find someone over there who speaks English? Now, it’s easy to find her, it’s easy to follow her. But, how do we make contact? How do you break the ice? How do we get her to talk to a total stranger? What’s the opening line?



One possible answer may be found in the following non-fiction account of what actually happened to me one day in 1978 on an escalator in Budapest.

I’d been in the city for over a week and found almost no one who spoke any English at all, or who even wanted to try. Speaking to no one was starting to drive me crazy. I knew some French but that was useless. Older people knew German but I knew very little. I knew some Russian but that was worse than useless: it was a sadistic insult to many who were forced to learn it under a cruel regime they hated, so I didn’t utter a word of it. I was stupid about a lot of things, but not that.

That day on the escalator, two guys were in front of me. One turned and asked something in Hungarian. I did my usual, “Sorry, do you speak English?” I probably said it dejectedly. I hadn’t met an English speaker yet. I was certain I wouldn’t until I went home.

How wrong I was. He smiled warmly and spoke English as elegantly as a suave young David Niven.

“Pardon me, please, I need to borrow a pen. Would you happen to have a pen, by any chance?”

Nice opener, right?

Of course, I had a pen. I’d been walking around scribbling all week. I smiled warmly back and handed him the pen. While he wrote something for his pal, I had a peek. He was nice-looking, mid-twenties, slim, a groovy silky scarf trying to be bohemian cravat. Well-cut overcoat, better-than-average haircut. By contrast, the guy in front was short, squat, stocky, plain and grey. Nicey and Grumpy again, that time-honoured double act.

He had a cheeky smile, just flirty enough, asking casual friendly questions, and I answered them all, open and friendly in return. Where was I from? How long was I visiting? What did I enjoy most in the city? Did I like music, really? Oh and art too, really? He happened to work as a teacher at an art college – what a coincidence. The students were having their end-of-term exhibition that very week, what good timing. And his colleagues knew all about folk music and dancing clubs. Would I like to come?

Well, of course I would.

He took my pen, wrote the address on a scrap, handed them both back with a smile.

I went the next day. Smiling.



Nowadays, and ever since 2006, this place is known as the Moholy-Nagy University of Art and Design, known by its local abbreviation MOME. It has been going since 1880. Rubik of cube fame went there, and later he was on the faculty, teaching Interior Architecture and Design.

That afternoon I went there, I bumped into Mr Cheeky Flirt right away. He seemed genuinely surprised to see me, as if he wasn’t expecting me at all. But he quickly changed gear and delivered me to a collection of their best English speakers, congregating in the library. He introduced me and then fled, never to be seen again. Some say he was The Procurer, but our next character was actually The Informant.

This gang of young art teachers enjoyed practising English, and clustered around a librarian named Ferenc, who was about forty, wearing baggy casual clothes and a huge wild beard. There was a lively flood of questions from all directions. They took me to a few folk dancing clubs, which were vibrant and great fun. These were not places we could talk, I was instructed. Beforehand, we met at Ferenc’s flat, where they spoke openly, complaining about the lack of freedom under the government – no travel, no foreign contact, no films or books or music or porn or anything. But, as we left to go to a club, they cautioned me to leave such talk behind, both those topics and complaints of any kind. Their view was that homes were not bugged but these clubs were, very much so.

Ferenc the Librarian was researching folk art (ceramics, textiles, woodwork, etc.) of a variety of nearby ethnic groups to compare and contrast the styles of different folk art traditions. It was hard to get support for this kind of research. He said the government was not in favour of these studies about differences among the outer regions, and certainly not about anything from further away than that.

He had trouble importing books from Western Europe or the Americas, for example, or anything about American and European folk art. This did not seem terribly dangerous to me, but it seemed typical of the petty power trips these new friends were complaining about. The Communist regime of Janos Kadar sought control for the sake of control, it was said.

Hypothetically, if he was having trouble getting support, it might help if he cooperated with the Immigration Department and reported on the weird American girl, for example. Looking at it from the other point of view, if Immigration wanted someone to interrogate this teenage capitalistic counter-revolutionary, they might choose this arty, bearded intellectual lefty who spoke English. Maybe dangle an academic carrot in front of him. Then get his sleazy but better-looking co-worker to reel her in.

Maybe the entire meeting was a set-up. Maybe he got his longed-for funding, and I hope so. I sent him the books he asked for. I’ve no idea if they got there, and did not expect a response anyway. I hope they reached him. They were beautiful.

Like a fly on the wall, I wish I could have watched the two guys follow me on the metro, get off when I did, and manoeuvre themselves onto the escalator, right ahead of me, just in time. Like a movie! A cheap one, too, where the short guy is like Boris Badenov, and if you don’t know him, look for Rocket J Squirrel, a friend of cartoon genius Dr Peabody.

With real spying as the theme, I thought of our cousin Jolan, who spied on her neighbour because she was sure she’d be tortured or killed if she did not. That was the 1950s, when such things happened a lot. Allegedly. But by the 1970s, the secret police didn’t need to torture or kill people like before. Their past deeds were enough of a threat. Everyone knew. Everyone was scared. Everyone complied. Very few exceptions, I’d have guessed.

Over forty years after that early visit, I wrote to the relevant government office and asked if they had any files on me. They said they did not. Does that mean they never existed? No. Will this remain a mystery? It will.

Here’s a possibility. After a few decades, someone sent an assistant into a dusty, overstuffed old storeroom marked “Boring Old Files” to turn them into kindling, or compost or just plain trash to make room for other things. I’ve done it. We’ve all done it.

This non-result was disappointing. I was hoping for some sort of Communist soap opera in which I had a small but peppery walk-on part. But no, I’d been written out. Maybe someone denounced me for being boring. Maybe there really was no file.

Maybe.

No, there must have been. There were files on everyone. But I believe them when they say there isn’t one now.

Recently, I discovered more about that librarian. I was pleased to see the scraps I remembered were accurate, plus I learned a bit more.

Ferenc Bodor (1941–96) was a historian, librarian, archivist, publicist, architecture and applied art critic, collector, gallery director, magazine editor and a unique figure during the post-war Kadar regime.

His book, Nomadic Generation, shows the interest of young Hungarian intellectuals in folk culture. He was vocal about conserving the legacy of disappearing folk culture, whereas the Communist regime tried to change or reform folk culture according to its modernising ideology.

On a lighter note, he was also a leading light in the Hungarian Moustache Society in Gelence (now in Romania).

They noted that Bodor, due to his origins in Transylvania, his independent attitude and his intellectual and artistic activities – which valued and encouraged the seeking of alternative lifestyles – was monitored and harassed by the Communist secret police.

They added that it was probably also because of his renowned beard. I must say, it was a whopper, and unruly. And a free spirit.

One last thought on those guys on the escalator. You could argue there’s no way they were with Secret Services. There were only two of them. No signs of an evil trinity. We rest our case.





CHAPTER XXV Day Three – More Cousins, More Plans


August 2020, from North-eastern Hungary Back to Budapest


A slum and a castle were the study in extremes for the morning. Our date with the other Z – the second new cousin, NC’s sister – had been made for the afternoon, so we started with the castle. It was vast, its grounds were vast, and there was a vast difference between this world and the tiny hovels and bungalows that surrounded it.

The estate and farm belonged to the aristocratic Karolyi family from the 1800s until land reforms after the Second World War. The castle has been a hunting lodge, a luxury hotel (1938–1944), and a film set – one based on the Antal Szerb novel The Pendragon Legend. It wore the Communist red star for a while. At another point, it was a sanatorium. In 2019 it hosted a Roman battle enactment, the photos displaying ten or twenty people in elaborate customs. Now the castle belonged to the government and was closed for renovations. Its new purpose was not yet clear.

We had a walk around the grounds and gardens, which were open and beautiful and huge. It made me see how feudal things had been – and still are in a way. A tiny number of people lived in great comfort with armies of servants, while the rest of us scratched about like chickens. Before, I had wondered whether this walk would be a pleasant waste of time, but now I felt how Grandma Anna may have felt.

NC was proud to say their mother was an excellent cook, and she used to work at the castle. Our Anna was known as a fine cook too, but never for being servile. She was quite the opposite, intensely bossy by all accounts. I couldn’t see her fitting into the world of service.

Looking at the map, it was vividly striking how far away all the other villages were. The estate took up most of the area, with a mini-village right at its back door – the servants’ quarters. This was the main employer of the entire region, I’d wager, with most of their employees living in shacks.

It’s no wonder Anna left.



Later that morning, I fulfilled a promise to a genealogy pen-friend that I’d visit her ancestral village, only ten minutes from mine. Also, thanks to a funny detour, I can say I was in Slovakia for half a minute. The map showed this village at the end of a long, roundabout road, in an isolated corner with its back up against the national border. I imagined somewhere poor and scary, harbouring armed smugglers, and we’d want to leave quickly. It wasn’t that bad, but we did not stay long. Anyway, the liveliest tales of smuggling were not here, but nearby on the Hungarian–Ukrainian border, which sounded like an ongoing sitcom with hairy-chested medallion men.

The village consisted of about fifty houses – from what we could see. Many roads were rough dirt tracks, where a car couldn’t go. If there was a cemetery, we couldn’t get to it. The church was ancient but deserted and dusty. Many houses looked abandoned and partially destroyed. It was hard to say which were inhabited. Quite a few people were walking around, either kids or teenagers with kids by the hand, also some older women. They all gave us hard stares. All were ragged, for the most part. I put down my camera.

My friend wrote back to ask why they stared. It was hard to say. We stood out. We were in a nice newish car, and there were few other cars in evidence. We had a different skin colour. They were not speaking Hungarian, but an unfamiliar dialect. There was a history of discord between various groups in this area.

It wasn’t the storybook village she imagined, sad to say. It’s also reminiscent of some early advice I was given: “You say you want to find cousins, but what if he’s a junky who steals your wallet?” This is a good question. You’ve no idea who you’ll meet. It’s best to be ready for anything.

Unlike the people in this bombed-out-looking place, we could escape.





Another Afternoon, Another Cousin


We met Z, NC’s sister, at the family’s weekend house, a cute place on a lake with a busy pretty garden, and a sweet veranda by the water surrounded by trees, flowers and chirping birds. It was a man-made lake, leftover from a mining quarry. Greenery had sprung up all around, and it was peppered with little docks and rowing boats.

Z led us to a table by the water, and on hearing what I now thought of as The Spiel, she wore the same warm, happy, if shocked, look as her sister the day before. Of course, NC had briefed her by phone, but the amazement was beginning to sink in. She, too, had no idea that their Erzsebet had a sister Anna who went to New York. Like her own sister, she was completely stunned to learn this.

She knew that one branch went to Canada – and I had no idea about them. They and their Canadians lost touch, slowly, over a few generations, as so often can happen.

Before I go into that, please accept the disclaimer that it’s easy to get tangled in these trees. For one thing, there are many Annas, Marias and Erzsebets. For another thing, I kept forgetting that this part of the tree was not symmetrical. Between the 1880s and the 1960s, their side managed to squeeze in four generations while our side produced only three.

Let’s start with our mutual ancestral links, sisters Erzsebet (HU) and Anna (USA), both born in the 1880s, their great-gran and my gran respectively. Erzsebet married Hutka and had two girls, Anna and Maria (of course), who split in much the same way as their mother and aunt did: this Anna stayed near her home village in Hungary, but her sister Maria went to Canada. There’s a whole branch of us there. They did very well in farming. I had no idea.

This Maria later came back to visit Hungary, at the height of their large-scale tobacco-farming success, which Z remembered well. Maria had transformed into a chic city woman, very cool with makeup and stylish clothes. She greatly impressed the wide-eyed young country girl, a peasant by comparison.

Z knew absolutely nothing of the Anna who went to New York. She certainly knew of Erzsebet, and Z was stunned she had any sister. We had the chart and walked her through it, which was mind-blowing for all of us. These things can become emotional very easily.

We all wondered why sisters Anna and Erzsebet did not seem to have stayed in touch, or not much. Was there some kind of rift? Were they just not close? Were they too incompatible, the one so soft and kindly and the other so hard and bossy? Were we imagining things?

Maybe letters went back and forth, but they were lost later.

Maybe Anna was blamed for the fire.

Maybe people drifted apart; these things happen.

We created all sorts of rumours disguised as theories, but they just floated around like dust in sunshine.

We escaped into the cool of the kitchen, where I could show her photos on the computer. The image of shy teenage Istvan and his parents transfixed her, as it still did me. These were our shared ancestors. There was DNA buzz. This was the boy whose grave we visited – whose grave NC and Hub have been tending for years, not even knowing who he was, which is a truly fine and humble act of love. It all got very real, very touching.

We sympathised with Anna receiving that photo of her parents and brother. Erzsebet wasn’t in the photo, but she wasn’t far away, in her own house with her own family. At the time of that photo, Istvan was fifteen, Anna was twenty with a baby, Erzsebet was twenty-eight with two.



As with NC, there was a point where Z stared at me thoughtfully, and finally asked why I was doing all this. When did I get so interested?

I was always interested. I only met one of my grandparents, who died when I was young, and I longed to know more about the others. It wasn’t possible for a long time, only much later, when I was nearly retired. I had a bit more time, and a bit more money, and a firm desire to deal with a childhood dream. I wanted to know, and now I knew. She listened to this whole mini-saga, my own spiel by now, and along the way, a lovely look crossed her face. Her replies were full of words like miracle, moving, thrilling.

As big projects go, this has been a lifetime best.



We kept talking, and migrated into the living room, and slid into soft comfortable sofas that would be hard to get out of later. We kept finding things to talk about. It was difficult to leave. None of this would have been possible without a full-time translator.

Z’s daughter is in the USA, and she missed her terribly, but they had some visits of a few months each. This daughter would probably translate messages for us! Z’s daughter was fine with English, but Z wasn’t. On her visits, she didn’t pick up very much, nor how to really fully use a computer. Still, I felt far worse at the moment, scarcely able to say anything in Hungarian.

We hated to leave but we had to. Still, we reassured each other, it wasn’t so bad. I’d be in the area for a while. It would be easy to have another visit soon – a month from now would be good. We were wrong about that, it turned out later, after Covid made up its mind.



Somewhere along that tired but happy journey back to the city, Karesz and I observed that these New Cousins were all devout Catholics and, while we’d spoken a great deal about Grandma Anna’s branch, we’d never got around to mentioning her husband’s Jewish branch. The subject just didn’t come up.

I thought that could wait. He didn’t argue.





SEPTEMBER





Hungarians, Canadians, a Yank and Some Thais





CHAPTER XXVI My Job Here is Done, I Dream of Hot Sun


September 2020, Week 1, Budapest


Autumn commenced triumphantly. I’d found living cousins, hurrah! I’d been waiting for this for a long time. Before, I’d found cousins in Vienna. This time, I found them here in Hungary. Mission Delightful! Back in Budapest, here was the summary I sent everyone:

An amazing few days just went by. I just visited northeast Hungary, hoping to find information about my paternal grandmother. We found a lot, and some real cousins too. Genealogist-detective-translator Karesz helped provoke a series of fortunate domino-events and outright lucky accidents, to discover that Gran had a sister Erzsebet we never knew existed. We located and met her two great-granddaughters, very sweet women about my age, who were surprised, welcoming, and happy, in that order.

Afterward, Z tried to phone me. I wish it had worked. My several hundred words in Hungarian did not go far. All I could do was repeat “Sorry, I don’t understand” in between laughing. Texts worked, but she disliked technology. We hit a sad wall. She sent memes and graphics in Hungarian, in formats I could not cut-and-paste to translate. So, via auto-translate – which usually does not work at all – I sent a message that I hope said, “My dears, I want to understand this poem, but I cannot. Maybe I know a hundred words in Hungarian. But I am thinking of you.”

She replied, “I also think a lot about you. Kiss. Take care of yourself. I’m so sorry we can’t talk.”

We all agreed eagerly to another visit in about a month’s time. (Of course, a year later that still hasn’t happened.) But I vowed to see them again, somehow.

I began concocting a dream weekend.

We meet at a big pretty country hotel with a fine restaurant where we gather, eat and drink very well, with English–Hungarian translators at every elbow. Since these cousins all live somewhat near the famous Tokaj wine region, this will be perfect. Or better yet, it can be some favourite place of theirs that fits the bill. At the end of the evening, we stagger upstairs where we’ve booked most of the rooms. Sunday brings a delicious late breakfast that turns into lunch, maybe another outing and even another lunch. Other interested cousins fly in from all over the world and I pay for all of it because a basket of money just fell from the sky.

It’s a dream. A person can dream. Let me dream.



Our two newest Hungarian cousins only knew a bit about their branch in Canada, whereas I didn’t even know we had one. It was their grandma’s sister Maria who went over to Canada, with her Hungarian husband and two small children. One of those two small children, Margit, in turn had a family, and it was via the magic of the internet that I found her granddaughter Jennifer. She was an active, regular visitor to the genealogy website where our family trees intersected. I wrote to her and got a speedy response. We quickly confirmed facts and started filling in each other’s missing puzzle pieces.

Meanwhile in Budapest, the first cold days just slapped us, and not in a light or fun way. Winter was coming, borders were closing, arthritis was rising. There were rules about The Virus, not all enforced and nothing consistent. The customary big traffic jam on Monday, with cars pouring into Hungary from Austria, escalated far more than usual. It became too time-consuming for police to check everyone. So they made the leap of faith that this meant they should scarcely check anyone, waving most of them through, yet bothering enough to cause huge disruption. It was too stupid a joke. This was all going to get worse.

I dreamed of warm places with palm trees and public health policies I agreed with. I didn’t want to argue, when everyone was arguing. I was hoping to quietly study my options and make my choice about where I was likely to be safest, for the time being – or at least in agreement with what they called safe. I like the consistency of the public health policy in southeast Asia. They meant what they said and they didn’t mess around or do anything in half measures. As a result, they were suffering less. Fewer people were dying. Despite all the confusion, arguing (internal) and ambivalence, back in my Hut was where I wanted to be at this moment in history, no vaccines in sight.

Overall, the recurring question was: can I avoid three dreaded and despised C-words: cold, Covid and commercial Xmas?

To me, this was not a comedy three, let alone a Magic Three. It was an Evil Coven.





Thailand was in some confusion too about their many visitors. On the one hand, when the pandemic blossomed, they shut their borders to tourists. Those few who came in were tested before and after their flights, strictly quarantined and monitored for two weeks.

What was not clear, on the other hand, was what to do with all the many tourists who were there already. Transport halved and halved again, and tourists were stuck. So were hundreds of thousands of Burmese workers waiting on those tourists hand and foot, but now stranded as well as unemployed and sometimes suddenly without the housing provided by their employers.

When large crowds swarmed the small local Immigration Office, and every boat that came in, it was too much. The government issued a series of “amnesties” for tourists: they would not be fined or punished if they overstayed their visas. Everybody got thirty days free. There was no comment about foreign workers that I could see. This was repeated each month during spring and summer.

By early autumn, there came rumours and unclear rumblings that maybe this policy of forgiveness would not last forever. Maybe a sudden ruling would order tourists to vacate quickly. Maybe that would be around 26 September, maybe not. Rumours further suggested that while the government supported keeping tourists there spending their money, the Immigration Department did not like losing track of people. They liked people checking in. They were not happy with indefinitely extending this messy unchecked freedom.

Rumours continued until tourists started to panic and leave in their hundreds of thousands. The rumours were just rumours, and on that September date all tourists were told they could stay, but this was too late. Fear drove them away; most were either gone already or in line to leave, not trusting the situation. There were other places to be a tourist. This was an expensive mistake for Thailand.

Next, they said they might start letting in some pensioners, but not all. I followed that story. In general, the rattled grapevine said it would be difficult, if not impossible, to go back to Thailand in 2020, unless you were in the millionaire, diplomatic or other exemption categories, which I was not – nor was anyone I knew. There were whispers the country might open a few more doors in December, their best time for tourism. One could only wait for word, hoping that word was from a reliable source. Everything needed extra double-checks. Everything was noticeably more time-consuming.

Then I had news from Mr and Mrs Landlord on the island, keepers of my Hut. They were in the process of building yet another bungalow. That made about ten, I think, besides the café, the restaurant and the two mansions. They had sold their city condo. His daughter said he was not doing as much of the work as he used to, but I think he was working as hard as ever.

Their daughter was more savvy about phones and cameras than they were, which showed them all talking into it, in a multi close-ups of three noses and mouths, two out of three not knowing the camera was on. We chatted, which made me miss them because they really are sweet people and good neighbours, and the further I go in life, the harder that is to locate. Also, we know how to make each other laugh.

This next bit of sweetness may have been what tipped the balance.

The phone was handed to their daughter, who went to my place, right next door, and showed me it was fine. Under the balcony, my bicycle “Old Silver” was dusty but safe. Lemon and banana trees, all fine. Everything was OK in their hands. I missed them. I missed my Hut and knowing who to trust, and also the weeds were high and I needed to swing my sweaty machete.

I started looking into flights. It was time to migrate.





CHAPTER XXVII Loose Ends, Facing the Equator


The Rest of September 2020


It was Budapest City Archives day. I hoped it might reveal some ancestral gossip. There was a potential case of fraud or embezzlement, a lengthy prenup, a divorce, and something mysterious about one spouse-to-be loaning money to the other. Annoyingly, it was not clear if the bride loaned money to the groom or vice versa. This was Cousin Olga and her third husband, Bruno the lawyer, a year before they married. They were living in the same building, but in different flats. I was getting more curious about them all the time.

However, at the archive, rules had changed – or rather, they were under new instructions from the current government. Now they withheld a lot more material, and it took a lot longer to get it. I’ve been there many times over the last four years, and I always got most of what I ordered in less than a week. This time, instead, I got a letter which was decoded as:

They are advising you to obtain a special scientific researcher’s status who has access to all records. If a director of any public collection, museum, institution, university signs a supporting document for you, you can have access to all documents without any problems.

If not, then, for an extra surcharge, their colleagues will check each record manually to see if there are any strictly protected personal data. If there aren’t any, they will release them to you, and if there are, they will delete those, and make copies of those records without those personal details. But then you would need to wait 5–6 weeks. I suggest you wait.

I waited.

A few things were released, most were not. To offer a silver lining, I am delighted to explain the following salutation heading the above news, as morphed by auto-translation: “Dear Swordsman Eileen!”

Isn’t that splendid? My surname Kardos means swordsman. Hungarians put surnames first and always end a greeting with an exclamation mark. Hence, my new nickname – Swordsman Eileen! I wish I could use this everywhere.





A Stark Embezzlement, 1923


Oszkar Stark was the youngest child of five, spawned by Granddad’s oldest sister Roza and her soldier husband Arnold Stark. Two of their kids died young, while the eldest, Margit, stayed with her mother, to the end. The two remaining boys, Karoly and Oszkar, both lived with Roza on Sziv (heart) street, until they were married. And, after Karoly got divorced.

But baby Oszkar? Little is known about him. As for the embezzlement case, the following is condensed from a court statement [with my additions]:

A court case about the embezzlement committed by Oszkar Stark born in Budapest June 1, 1898, Israelite religion, salesman [elsewhere his occupation was agent, or officer, which could mean anything]. In 1923 he borrowed from Mrs Mihály Greiner M. née Ottilia Hübecher 25 stocks of the Goldberger company worth more than 500 thousand crowns. [What would 500,000 crowns be worth today?!] He sold these not owned by him, and used the incoming payment for his own purposes. [Oh Oszkar, did you really?] Mrs Greiner was victim and witness, Károly Stark as witness. Advocate to be named.

With all those lawyers in the family, they hadn’t found one yet? That did not look good. Karoly was his big brother, maybe a character witness? Very loyal. Somehow I’d believe it if you told me big brother Karoly rescued baby Oszkar more than once. At this point, Oszkar was twenty-five, single and in court. Big brother Karoly was thirty-one, a stockbroker and businessman, a war veteran and a settled married man, and yes, all of this is just a silly, wild-guessing game, but I repeat, it did not look good.

Two years later, in 1925, teen sibling brother Imre died, and so did their father, Arnold Stark. On the plus side, Karoly and his wife Gabriella had their baby daughter Vera.

As far as Oszkar’s embezzlement case went, a later document said that this file was marked “punished” but without any details! That’s disappointing to a gossip.

Over twenty years after that, Karoly Stark’s name came up again, when he died of TB in May 1947. His death record showed his grown daughter, Vera, reported his death. A simple search of her name showed she’d been in trouble with the police in September of that same year. Same name, same address, same dad.

The following is from her “Criminal Proceedings Record”:

24 September, 1947. Co-tenants conflict. Mrs Szan, wife of Karoly, 38, got into a conflict with her co-tenant Vera Saghelyi, in their shared flat at Hajos street 30 (Budapest). Vera Saghelyi punched with her fist the pregnant Mrs Szan during the altercation, and Mrs Szan fell unconscious. The police started a case against Vera Saghelyi.

I found no court records. Perhaps they settled somehow. She may have been born in 1922 or after, since her parents married in 1921. That put her in my mother’s age group but in a much higher boxing class, to be sure. About the actual knockout, there were two different translations. One said the punched lady “fell unconscious”. The other said she “fell into a swoon”. I suspect it was not a romantic clunk to the floor.

Present-day Cousin Vera’s thoughts were these:

Budapest was massively destroyed in the war, 40 per cent of the houses bombed or shot. Former bourgeois apartments were settled by homeless people, as instructed by the housing office. That was the case in many cities.

I only know the description in the book by Imre Nadas called Parallel Stories, where he describes life in these post-war communities. Wall to wall women, men, families. Love, hate, hope, sadness, bitterness, Nazis, Jews. Only separated by thin walls with the same kitchen and toilet. A forced community. More than 100,000 surviving Jews and many more fascist friends.

I was actually always surprised how little Jews took revenge directly. They may have let their own family feel their traumas, but hardly the outside world. Vera Saghelyi, maybe yes.

I never learned much more about Vera Saghelyi. Let’s turn back to her dad, Karoly Saghelyi (born Stark – and aren’t we all?). What else did we know?

1892Born In Budapest.

1921Married Gabriella Lichtstein.

1923Helped his little brother Oszkar (we hope) in an embezzlement case.

1925His father and teenage brother died, and his daughter was born.

1938He changed his surname from Stark to Saghelyi (less Jewish, more Hungarian). He was divorced by now. (His now ex-wife Gabriella changed her surname to Lenard.) He also converted to Lutheranism.

1940The Budapest census said he was divorced and living in district VI.

1945His sister and mother died during the Battle of Budapest.

1947He died of TB, having moved back into the ancestral home on Sziv street, where he grew up. What happened to that place, which was in the family for generations? Hard to say. The City Archives were missing all its files from the mid-1930s to the mid-1950s. His ex-wife Gabby was listed as a living widow on his death document.

By contrast, we know very little about baby Oszkar. He was born in 1898, committed fraud at the age of twenty-three but was punished, got married at twenty-nine, and that’s all we know. There was something slippery about this one. I was trying not to write “Brat?” into his profile. I was trying to ignore such moronic hunches in my cheap plastic crystal ball.



As for his daughter, Vera the boxer, I was not expecting to find her, but she popped up. And so, voilà, like I’ve said before: if you shake and shake your apple tree, a mile away, oranges will fall down. Please attribute me on that one.

I had loads of questions about Vera:

What happened to her after the punch-up incident?

Did she have to move out after she clobbered her flatmate?

Would anyone rent her a room after that?

Was it surprising that reprisals were few?

At the time her father died, Vera – in her mid-twenties – was living with neither parent, but with co-tenants. Where was her mother Gabriella? I could find no sign of her.

The document about the punch-up was only a summary of the report. I wanted to see the full document, but that was not provided. On the other hand, now I’ve seen more than a few of these police and criminal reports, I can say that there is a suspicious lack of details in some of them.

For now, there was no further news on this branch. Research continued.



At home, the spare guest mattress was propped against the wall like a headboard, which made reading in bed very comfortable. No one was visiting any time soon. The Vienna cousins and I went through another flood of communications, full of wishful thinking about how it might be possible to visit. But of course, it was not.

My reply to them:

The Hungarian Covid rules are not clear at all. They change every week. Now, anyone who comes here must do a two-week quarantine, and maybe in Vienna too. I’d like to see you all, but I do not want to bring you germs. But whenever I do come, I’d like to arrive with a big suitcase, half of it bearing gifts – flodny cake! Palinka! Your favourite Hungarian sausages!

Then when I return to Budapest, I’ll carry all the books and winter clothes I left with you. I forgot when or what. It seems long ago. And – oh my goodness, I still have a set of your house keys!

Later, Andreas wrote that it would be good to see each other in December, but he was convinced the situation would not change until summer 2021.





Insiders, Outsiders


My winter coat’s zip was broken, and the rattling windows needed curtains for wind-proofing. There were at least three tailors nearby – something I was not used to, a welcome treat. Local businesses always got my custom first. I have arranged these sorts of things with nothing but a sketch and a smile in many nations where we shared not a word. I enjoyed this puzzle. Here I arrived with the sketch and a short note written by a local: “Please shorten these curtains. I want them two metres long. Thank you, and I am sorry I do not speak your language.” With something simple like this, it’s worked many times.

Until now.

I got two Grumpies in a row, old Hungarian seamstresses who did not want the trade of an outsider, or perhaps I should say Outsider. One said I could wait a month, or two. One said I could pay five times the going rate. There was much pretending they didn’t understand either the note in Hungarian or even the sketch. I did try, but they made themselves clear.

If I tried again, would it be “third time lucky”? Or would I get another witch, the remaining member of the Coven of Grumpies in District XIII? Three makes a coven, after all. No, this had to change. This was no longer about curtains. Now it was personal, a matter of trust and goodwill and decent manners. Also, the cold was coming. I reluctantly retreated to the English-speaking expat sector, a sort of city within this city. There I got curtains, a repaired winter coat and some new friends.

Lovely Jodi the tailor fixed my jacket and hemmed my curtains in her cute studio. I admired a portrait of her, in oils, full of vivid colours that danced off the wall, somewhat Frida Kahlo in style but not so dark, more joyous. The artist was a friend and neighbour, Maomi, who met us the next day. We became friends right away.

I learned about her sons’ rock band, The Durgas, and their previous band A Subtle Plague, and her rock-granny status. I gave her a copy of one of my books, and she was touched – not out of politeness, really touched. She quickly invited me to an art exhibition of a friend of theirs, which was happening the very next day. I do not usually make friends this fast. She said she either does or she doesn’t – she knows instantly.

It was an outdoor, socially distanced event – with wonderful weather. In fact it was freakily wonderful weather for a few blessed days. There buzzed a subtle undercurrent of a last hurrah, our last bit of warmth for a while. Autumn was coming, and so were lots of restrictions. It was September, and plague-time, after all.

Maomi’s husband DaiDai was an architect who had taken the family to live all over Africa and Asia, where he built schools. They led an extraordinary life. And now they were here, in their eighties with millions of wacky, wonderful, awful and other stories. I wish they would write their book too! We had a jovial meeting with their vibrant friends and agreed to meet again, knowing it might not be for a while. Cold and curfews were closing in.

I had to accept that I might be staying here, and might be facing a cold winter. There was no way to know for sure. It was the not-knowing that was driving us nuts.

I was still, come what may, in pursuit of avoiding the three Cs. At first I joked, then it became serious. If it were possible and safe, if I were to go anywhere, I hoped the timing would induce a quarantine that exempted me from everything between 25 December and 2 January. I knew better than to call this a plan, because nowadays if you called something a plan, it was already past its sell-by date. Still, one could dream.

This was a serious dream. I’ve already made it clear that I am not a fan of that time of year, and that is an extreme understatement. Please don’t get me started. All I can say is, if I had to do something on 25 December, I’d ask to join Jewish friends eating Chinese food, like they do in New York City. What’s not to love? That I would happily do. But as things stood, I’d shift into full avoidance mode as a super-hermit. Or, a miracle might happen, and I could get to Thailand exactly in time to be quarantined for the last two weeks of the year. That would truly be a gift.



In Budapest, the stupidity of a lockdown and general fear was making many people frustrated and moody, angry and snap-tempered. I include myself. Things were turbulent inside and out. It was the dread of the coming cold which meant a certain amount of physical pain and boring loneliness, although it would be temporary, after all. So far, I only had first-world problems to deal with. I had work, food and shelter. I had my ways, if small, of helping those who didn’t. Watching death counts was chilling. I felt helpless.

And dang, was I short-tempered? We all were.

Leaves in the courtyard garden were starting to turn. If I had to hunker down anywhere for a whole cold winter, it may as well be here. There were some good people to help. There was a nice daily walk by a big river. There was strudel. I’d just have to live in bed covered in blankets for a few months. Perhaps I needed a child’s blanket-fort as a substitute for my tropical mosquito net, my new magic tent fortress.

My six-year-old blanket-tent fantasies? When I played Supergirl and other super heroes, we flew around the globe rescuing people from earthquakes, floods and landslides. I covered all continents, providing both mountain and sea rescue, volcanoes included. I think I could have written a pandemic into those scenarios, if I’d known the word.

Another youthful fantasy was flying around the world building hospitals. I think the actual image was flying around and flinging them down whole, one town or city at a time. They came with a hundred years of money for staff, equipment with upgrades, plus a whole department that did nothing but raise money for the next hundred years. I’d thought that through.

That plan didn’t get very far in terms of actual funding.

In reality, I have regularly given small donations of cash and/or time to a number of good causes over the years, but nothing dramatic, and I wish there were more to show for that.

Otherwise, my best accomplishment all this month was not slapping anyone.





OCTOBER


Are We There Yet?





CHAPTER XXVIII Escaping or Not?


October 2020


At the start of October, my reaction was “Eek!” The year is three-quarters over? Very little went to plan. The very idea of plans had washed away. I missed plans. I used to enjoy them.

Cold was creeping into my neighbourhood and my bones, and I was dreaming of warmer climates, knowing I might be trapped here. Thank heavens there were many beauties and amusements to distract me. This month’s silver linings:





Tram Number 2


This bright spot was a popular line with many people, who rode it just to ride it, back and forth, and I did too (off hours, mask on, windows open). It starts north of the centre, hugs the Danube most of the time, goes around three sides of Parliament, passes superb views of the Buda hills across the river, spectacular architecture and very nice parks. It is nice and lengthy and ends at the National Theatre. More than once, I’ve ridden it end to end just for the tour, and I was not the only one.

Noted visual highlight: one time, a lady on the tram had a pink mask with images of fish all over it. The mask had a funny shape, like a huge bird’s beak, sagging low. She was a pelican.





Show Business


They were filming in our area, which did have beautifully restored old architecture. So we were stylish and cool for a few days. I admired all the old-style costumes and props, and the vehicles especially. I asked an idle crew member if the film was set in the 1930s or 1940s. She looked annoyed and said, “No, 1960s.” Yes, that would be annoying if your home in the 1960s looked like Europe several decades earlier. The Exam had this promotional blurb: “In Communist Hungary, circa 1957, a member of the secret police whose job it is to evaluate citizens’ loyalty is unknowingly spied on by his mentor.” I made a note.





From the Food File: Langos


I did it. I finally tried the famous (or infamous) langos (“LANG-gosh”), a fried flatbread – not flat like a pita but fluffier, maybe slightly sweetened, always fried within an inch of your arteries, and slathered in more oil or butter or sour cream or cheese or all of it and more. It’s been called a heart attack waiting to happen. It’s extremely popular here, almost iconic.

I assume any topping is potentially possible, and I’ve seen some groovy hipsterised versions pretending to be healthy. But mostly, I saw the good old cheesy, greasy kind, sometimes with optional ham. I assume that’s the old-fashioned, traditional classic, so I went not to a cool market but a shabby one.

My langos was massive, and hung over the edges of the oily and soggy paper plate. I ate most of it, felt awful, and vowed not to repeat this again soon. But I see the appeal, and they smell good in a terrible way.

In theory I’d submit to a less oily type – if that weren’t a total contradiction in terms: a not-too-oily fried thing is a silly idea. Perhaps I’ll file this under “don’t knock it until you’ve tried it”. Now I’ve tried it, like a good guest – and most food deserves a try.

Still, deep down in the evil recesses of my belly, there murmur rebellious, unhealthy cravings sometimes. When I succumb in such moments, I’ll probably still go to pizza, but langos was now a viable Plan B. We all have our little weaknesses.





Cane Day


Almost getting killed focused my mind. Drivers think I can move fast and sometimes I cannot. My old medical cane used to signal that message. But, when my back got better, the medical cane seemed over the top, a fraudulent visual claim. If I felt at all tippy, though, a cane was great, and this one could collapse into a suitcase. Without it, when tippy, I took a tall umbrella to keep my balance. This destroyed its point, and made no sense on a sunny day.

Cities are filled with cars threatening pedestrians, and waving an umbrella at them is pathetic. A sword would not be allowed, even though my name means swordsman and I’d love to learn how to handle one. The middle way was a non-medical cane, a walking stick that said She’s Just A Bit Old, rather than She’s Old And Seriously Disabled, which I am not. It should not say Defensive Weapon, though that’s exactly what I was thinking, in the spirit of a Plan B. I needed a thuggish baseball bat in the shape of a modest walking stick – a humble wooden cane.

I found the perfect shop for it, the place itself made entirely of gorgeous wood. It sold nothing but beautiful wooden canes and beautiful wooden pipes, all in a variety of lovely woods. It was a fabulous experience. I chose a simple classic, the colour of dark honey. The shopkeeper took one look at my height, and in one slice, cut the cane to the perfect length. A master of his trade.

It was a proper walking stick. I was grey and I was proud, and now I was properly furnished.





World Events, Local Solutions


2020 was the year of a US presidential election, and I finally got the scoop on the most reliable way to get my ballot to arrive. Lately – meaning the last decade or three – it has not been easy or straightforward to vote from overseas. Every US state does something different, and it takes a heck of a lot of advanced organisation. Information keeps changing, too. But we will get there, I thought. We will persist.

My US election ballot did not arrive; isn’t that reassuring? Eventually, I worked out how to get a back-up. By then, it was too late to post it back, most likely, unless I paid a heap to a private courier. Luckily the US Embassy here guaranteed a timely delivery if I got it to them by the following Thursday. I was fortunate that, unlike Americans all over Hungary in small towns and cities, I lived an easy, short tram ride or even a long walk from my US Embassy (the nice number 2 tram, no less). Yes, I was on top of things. I went there dutifully first thing Monday morning.

The Embassy was closed. It was Columbus Day. I had no idea. Democracy reconvened on Tuesday.

The next day, I voted. The very nice and unbelievably enormous guy at the gate helped. He tested my envelope for dangers, and was about it to put it in the box, when he stopped himself short and asked me politely, even smilingly, if I’d like to do the honours myself. I sure did. In the past, I’ve skipped some elections but I am never doing that again. He handed it to me and I cast that vote. I felt no hint whatsoever of how he may have voted, and this is to his strong credit. From him I felt nothing but plain everyday democratic respect as a fellow citizen, and therefore, I wanted to shake his hand. Current public hygiene rules to do with Covid forbade that sort of contact, so I saluted him – which he liked.

I had time for a victory lap around Freedom Square. The US Embassy there is overshadowed by a large central Soviet memorial, and is that enough symbolism for you? The Embassy is a pale building, mostly hidden by trees coincidentally planted just after the erection of the nearby massive column crowned with the Soviet red star, celebrating either the liberation or “liberation” of Budapest (depending on how you look at it) by the USSR’s Red Army in 1945. They chased out the Nazis and brought Communist rule for a delightful, totally uncontroversial few decades, without the slightest hint of coercion. Or irony.

The statue in the foreground is of US President and terrible actor Ronald Reagan, whose friendship with Soviet Premier and rather good actor Mikhail Gorbachev was credited with thawing the Cold War. I’d rather see a statue of Gorby, or maybe of both of them shaking hands, but perhaps there are enough Soviet mementoes around here. Anyway, Ronnie and Gorby were much more popular outside their home nations. Many of us know the feeling.



Elsewhere in a Budapest that was getting chillier and chillier, there were outdoor cafés that traditionally provided heaters, blankets and delicious hot mulled wine. Otherwise, eateries started closing as the temperature dropped, since indoor dining was banned. October had some nastily cold days, and my left hand was stinging. Could I get through a winter, ignoring this until spring? Could I at least visit cousins a mere few hours away by train? Could I join all the missions I saw on the internet, tempting me to cheat and try to out-wit the latest Covid rules? I was unsure of everywhere. I was a river of questions. The world was a river of questions.

The Hungarian country cousins wrote to say we should postpone our next visit to a better, safer and healthier time. I had to agree with them, sadly. On the other hand, my city cousins in Vienna were prepared to welcome me, in theory. But now travel needed tests, two weeks’ quarantine – perhaps twice, in each direction! And that was besides the chance I might deliver the virus to their entire city, with special attention to my elderly relatives.

I did not like the idea of taking the train, not in these times, no vaccines in sight. There was car hire, but it might have been cheaper to buy six train tickets and try to seal off a whole compartment – as if you could fence out gate-crashers. I doubt you could. It didn’t matter. There were dreams and hobbies to occupy an idle mind so I didn’t turn into a devil’s workshop. It was obvious I couldn’t see my cousins for a while, whoever did the travelling. My visit back in February might be our whole ticket for 2020. And so, we plotted for spring 2021.



Speaking of dreams, in Thailand this month, they started cautiously allowing some of the European pensioners back in. It all looked very unpredictable. Intrepid friends went first, and I watched their example. It was not straightforward. Something went awry and they had to reschedule for later in the month. But it gave me hope. More importantly, they shared their first-hand knowledge. These were very organised people who provided precise details, which was more than I could get from anyone in an official capacity. That was no one’s fault. Information was like a kaleidoscope, changing with nearly every move.

All of life was starting to feel like a constantly mutating Rubik’s Cube, with no answer. May I remind you Rubik was Hungarian, by the way?

Still, by the end of the month, the intrepid friends got back to their little shack in Thailand. I’m kidding – I’m in a shack; they’re in a lovely luxury villa. They reported to me the ins and outs of choosing where to quarantine, and how to get there in the first place. They blazed the trail. I decided I’d follow. It might involve delays and cancellations, so flexible terms and refund policies were now a big part of my daily homework. And I needed a Plan B, in case it didn’t work. I needed an alphabet full of plans in a big flexible bag of tricks.

I braced myself for winter in Budapest while continuing to plot to escape from it altogether. My end-of-month inner assessment might again brag that I had not shouted at anyone directly, but there was a certain amount of shouting at the walls.





CHAPTER XXIX A Weird Detour: Memories of Hallstatt


The Vienna cousins and I were reduced to phone and video calls, and we tried to get used to that. We were also reduced to reliving previous visits. One of my favourites by far was when they took me to the Austrian town of Hallstatt, which has a strange story behind it. It’s a stunningly beautiful place, truly heavenly, a bit remote, perched on the edge of an Alpine mountain lake of a penetrating blue, with gorgeous old elaborately hand-carved wooden houses clinging to a dramatic cliffside, and an ancient past that goes back to prehistoric times.

It’s also phenomenally cluttered with Chinese tourists, which I witnessed first-hand, to my perplexed shock. This was bizarre. The influx was due to an unusual project – or, some say, scam – in which an entire Austrian town was copied and built in China

Hordes of Chinese tourists flock here because they know Hallstatt’s sister city, a nearly perfect replica of the original’s town centre. When I say nearly perfect, I mean to the millimetre, in almost every tiny detail. It is not a miniature model, but exactly to the same scale.

Some say this was done without the Austrians’ full knowledge. Others say it was one big lovely profitable handshake. There is no agreement about what actually happened. Austrian and Chinese sources differ to this day.

Once upon a time, a Chinese entrepreneur was so taken with the Austrian town, he decided he’d build an exact copy back home. He designed it as a luxury housing development in the city of Luoyangzhen in the southern province of Guangdong, about two hours’ drive north of Hong Kong.

To do this, he and his team asked the Austrian town’s mayor if they could photograph, survey and measure up the whole place to build a model. Some say the Chinese guests implied it was for a table-top version. It was not. It was another whole town, same exact size, same exact every damned thing, down to the textures on the manhole covers.

Allegedly, Mayor Alexander Scheutz said he saw a chance for tourism. They got more than they bargained for.

The copy town was developed by a mining company, China Minmetals, for over 900 million US dollars. Their apartments are mostly still under construction and are for sale. They are clustered around the replica town square and surroundings, including the church which functions as a real estate office to sell the apartments. Also, for some reason, there is an English-style phone booth – perhaps a quaint error. Chinese assistants are dressed in lederhosen and dirndl skirts.

Despite the apartments being unfinished, the town became quite a tourist attraction within China. After that, millions of Chinese tourists, of course, had to see the real thing. Now the Austrian town – more like a village – is so overrun, it’s a misery for the locals, and some inhabitants wish they’d known what was afoot. Some were suspicious from the start and opposed it.

Today, many visitors believe Hallstatt too is merely a model town and a museum, not real. These visitors walk straight into private homes assuming they are display models. There are locked gates and signs everywhere saying Private, This Is Not A Museum, This Is A Private Home, Do Not Enter, Do Not Point Cameras Into Our Windows, and so on. Personally, I’d never open a curtain again, if I hadn’t already sold up and fled long ago.

On our trip, the town was busy with visitors, but it was trudgeable. The cold grey rain may have discouraged some. The crowds were indeed about 90 per cent Chinese. However, my favourite image of the whole day was of two Muslim girls in headscarves and long robes and very nice trainers. Pretty, happy teens. One had a jacket with a big slogan on the back: “It’s Never Too Late To Start Again”. Her friend did close-up photography of her cardboard mini-tray of French fries or chips or whatever they’re calling fried potatoes.

This may be the only known example to date of a whole town being copied, but there is a trend in China to build replicas of other parts of the world. There is a copy of the Eiffel Tower, and several copies of European castles. There is a Jackson Hole Wyoming resort. A “Hometown USA” is outside of Beijing, based on Orange County, California. The luxury housing estate “One City, Nine Towns” in Shanghai is mostly vacant. There are also bits of Venice, Italy, to be found in Chinese shopping malls.

To lend even more surrealism to the Hallstatt experience, one must visit the Skull Room. It’s just what it sounds like, with artwork. Twelve hundred elaborately decorated human skulls are housed and displayed in Hallstatt Charnel House, which has stood there since the twelfth century.

This tiny but ancient Austrian town ran out of space in their cemetery. Thus began their custom of allowing a body to rest there for only ten or twenty years, after which it was dug up and placed in the Charnel House. The pamphlet read:

The skull was cleaned and bleached by the sun and the moon for some weeks, until all signs of decay had disappeared, and the skull took on a mild ivory colour. The skulls were painted with floral motifs as a sign of love. This tradition was started in 1720.

Thigh bones were stacked on the lower shelves, in the manner of firewood. The last skull was placed there in 1995; it belonged to a lady who died in 1983. It still has her gold teeth.

See what we’re missing, with travel curtailed?

NOVEMBER





I Said, Are We There Yet?





CHAPTER XXX False Starts, Several Tries


November 2020


I was a spoiled brat tugging at the trouser hem of Father Time, asking “Can I please go home now?” The Hut had been my winter home for years. What I remember clearly about that November was when serious cold set in, my left arm seized up, and I began frantically seeking an escape, like a rat in a cage.

It was possible, in theory, but complicated. The main challenge was getting the right information. Or rather, it was not one challenge but a constant, ongoing challenge. Even if you got the right information, it was hard to be sure, and it could change at any point. Travel was suspenseful as well as controversial. Anything could change; anything could be cancelled. One had to get a medical test, exam and papers only a few days before the flight, and sometimes the results did not come back in time. You could lose badly. My plan (Ha! Plans again!) was to somehow get to Bangkok, do their required two weeks’ quarantine, then return to The Hut, which was waiting for me, as was the dusty sweet bicycle. There, I could hide, live simply and, for a few months, avoid the three Cs – those poisonous triplets, yet another evil coven. There, I could feel more safe.

Meanwhile in Budapest, it was all uncharted waters, and unclear how and where to get a test. Lots of phone numbers and email addresses simply did not answer. It took dozens of enquiries to work out what to do. Finally, I found a clinic, tested negative, and saw their doctor who – like everyone else – had never heard of a “fit to fly” testimonial, but wrote a reasonable letter after nicely and professionally poking me with questions and implements. I was honoured to be seen by someone who made excellent use of both English and perfectly understated irony.

I tried to get to the dentist, but realised I’d soon see my Thai dentist who is first class, cheaper, and there was almost no Covid there. I skipped the haircut too. I’d be back in a few months anyway (or so I thought. No, I had learned nothing on that score.).

I set everything up to leave mid-November. It was a long string of dominoes starting in a cold northern city and ending up in a jungle hut, with astonishing amounts of paperwork along the way.

Things did not go to plan. That attempt failed and got rescheduled for a few weeks later.

Of course, I’d already said all my goodbyes to everyone I knew in Budapest! It was a silly situation, like I was a ghost for a little while, in travel-limbo. I needed to amuse myself while waiting. What better way than some harmless ancestral gossip? I returned to some old files.





Olga


Her nickname was Olga neni – everybody’s auntie. I dubbed her Olga of the Three Husbands (lawyer, doctor, lawyer). It’s sad to say, this next bit of news was surprisingly vitriolic. Cousin Olga was someone I almost felt I knew because of the affectionate way Andreas spoke about her. She was a cousin and pal of Jolan – Andreas’s Aunt Jolan who took him in when he was a teenage war orphan, who as his second mother, took him each day to eat surprisingly well in Olga’s post-war home lunch-room. Andreas always brightened at the sound of Olga’s name, and vicariously this gave me a soft spot for her too.

This document was to do with her second husband of three, Dr Jeno Barsony, a leading obstetrician and professor at the university hospital. Barsony, by the way, means velvet in Hungarian, but something very un-velvetty happened here. Only two months after their wedding, they were living separately and not even speaking, at which point, Olga legally declared her intention to divorce – with Jolan as witness, at the notary. None of us could guess what might have happened, but it must have been bad. The couple divorced. Then he sent her the following document to sign.

“I, Olga Neufeld, the undersigned hereby declare that my former husband Dr Jeno Barsony does not owe me anything, and will never owe. I am not starting any claims against him, now or ever in the future. I will never take him to court. I will not bear his name even not as ‘the former Mrs Jeno Barsony’ because I am not entitled by law to use it anymore. For every single breaking of this agreement and using his name, I am to pay him 1,000 pengo [a short-lived currency].” Signatures, etc.

That seemed harsh.

Also involving Olga was an annoying official contemporary block against seeing documents about a loan of money either to or from her third husband, the lawyer Bruno – and that particular lack of detail is even more frustrating. Did he borrow or did she? This was a year before she married him, 1937. That same year, a statement about this loan and account was notarised. Again, I have not seen the document.

However, as far as the angry Dr Velvet doctor was concerned, I’m pleased to rebelliously report that she signed her name exactly as he ordered her not to: Mrs Bruno Savoly, formerly Mrs Jeno Barsony (Dr), born Olga Neufeld. I liked her spirit for that. Let the doctor send his petty demand for punishment money – how much was it? A thousand pengo? Was any amount of pengo worth anything at all at that point? What was Budapest’s finest obstetrician and professor so damned angry about at home? Why did he try to forbid her to state they were married once? And why did Olga file for divorce so damned fast?

We will never know. This was a research cul-du-sac and a fat sack of emotional chilli peppers.

Next file, please?





Gyorgy Emod’s Life in the Theatre


This was our one luvvy, actor, director and translator of Shakespeare and other classics into Hungarian. He was an art and book collector as well.

He was the only direct descendant of our Great-Uncle Rezso, Granddad’s brother, the lifelong banker who facilitated many of the family’s business interests and whose trail disappeared in the 1950s during the harshest of the Communist times, a bit after he was alleged to have been printing anti-Communist pamphlets. We may never know what happened exactly. Reportedly Rezso was aided by his son, Ferenc, who was a chemist. We don’t know what happened to either of them.

Gyorgy Emod jr was Rezso’s only grandson, the only child of his daughter Klara who married Gyorgy Emod, sr. Gyorgy jr and I were born a few years apart. At an extended family gathering, we’d have sat at the same table, ageing single cousins lumped together. He died in 2013, aged fifty-eight. He worked mainly in theatres in Budapest, but also Veszprem and Gyor. He played Shakespeare’s Orsino, Ross and Flute. He was in productions of Brecht, Jokai, Moliere, Sophocles and adaptations of Dostoevsky, Gorky and Gogol.

He was in the 1989 film The Music Box, highly recommended: Jessica Lange won both Academy and Golden Globe awards. Powerful star turn from Armin Meuller-Stahl, directed by Costa-Gavras, written by Joe Eszterhas. Gyorgy played Andras Nagy, long-standing Attorney General, and Justice Minister who, after the Second World War, was jailed for life by the People’s Tribunal of Budapest, and eventually died there.

Whatever riches Great-Uncle Rezso accrued in his lifetime would have pointed straight in the direction of his only grandson Gyorgy. The one thing to prevent this would be the lack of a will. Gyorgy was worth a lot, it turned out. Besides some presumed inheritance, he had an extensive art collection and library, plus cash and more, yet oddly but allegedly he had no will. Or rather, no will appeared. This is why it all went to the government upon his death.

A few years ago, probate investigators were sniffing around my online family tree, wondering if I might lead them to some direct heir of Rezso, which we now think does not exist. They smelled a commission, which suggested they saw Reszo’s estate as potentially large potatoes. Again, oddly and allegedly, Reszo’s will couldn’t be located either. Without that, nothing could be reclaimed by any living heir, and they did not mean a second cousin.

I find it highly unlikely that both Rezso and Gyorgy neglected to leave a will. That family was obsessed with legal documentation. I’ve been trawling through it for years. Everyone had a prenup and a will and more. If these two wills “got lost”, that’s a very strange event. If, in truth, they never existed, that’s much stranger still.

For the hell of it, it seemed worth asking what happened to Gyorgy’s collection, so I wrote a few letters. The collection went from pillar to post, as the Brits say, migrating a bit. At first the collection went partly to the Museum of Applied Arts, partly to the National Gallery, but in the end, it went to the Hungarian National Museum.

This is a famous landmark in Budapest. In 1848 – and it is re-enacted annually – on its well-known steps, beloved national poet Sandor Petofi called the people to arms, to fight for their freedom, against the Habsburg Empire: “Rise up, Magyars! Your country calls. It’s now or never, what fate befalls!” They were cruelly crushed, but are commemorated wholeheartedly every year.

In 1956, beloved national treasure and actor Imre Sinkovits read the same poem, at the time of that year’s revolt against the Soviets. This too was cruelly crushed, this time in front of the entire world’s press and their film cameras, which some say destroyed forever the credibility of an all-controlling Communist regime in the then USSR, and began its eventual downfall.

Somewhere beyond those steps were Gyorgy’s things, possibly still in their boxes. Here’s my oh-so polite letter, which in this sequence of three, was also crushed albeit diplomatically and politely:

Dear Sir / Madam!



As an English citizen of Hungarian descent, I am here in Budapest to research my family. I know that my cousin, the actor, director and translator Gyorgy Emod, had an art collection that now belongs to your museum. Can you confirm this?

If so, I’d like to know what’s in the collection too: I’d be interested in anything about our family: pictures of our common ancestors, documents, anything. Please see if we can find something that may be relevant to our family-tree research.



Grateful thanks from

Swordsman Eileen!

What I learned was that his collection contained goldsmiths’ works, porcelain and ceramic objects, together with related notes and a library of almost ten thousand volumes.

Did that say, ten thousand volumes? Meaning, over ten thousand books? I felt faint and slightly ill when they said everything was still in its delivery boxes, and they were really terribly busy people with better things to do. But, if they were to find any family-related notes, they’d let me know, they said.

Was that likely? No.

Those ten thousand books were possibly now going to sweat and slowly rot over time. It might be even longer, now that I have asked. This was a sad legacy, speaking booklover-to-booklover, but it happens with Things. It was not the first time I’d see people grab things and store them mainly so no one else had them. It was like kids hoarding marbles so that no one can play.

There were no winners in such moments.



Meanwhile, I was still trying to escape the cold and head toward the equator. A letter came from Andreas, asking what healthcare was available to me, on my various migrations:

In Thailand, what’s the health system? By the way, the health system in Hungary is also problematic.

Jolan said, before she died – enough!



I think of you often.

Andreas

We knew we could not visit, not yet. We hoped it would be possible this coming spring, in 2021.

Everyone I know – people from all over the world – believed that in terms of the Covid situation, I’d be much better off in Asia, in particular in Thailand. I agreed with them – at that moment.

So, I had my ticket to go east. It could be delayed again. It could all be cancelled. Anything could happen. The not-knowing was weirdly tense and distracting. You could make a tiny error or they changed a tiny rule, and then you’d be turned away at the airport gate. No matter what, my compass was trained on that gate. I would fly, eventually.





DECEMBER


Prison, Freedom, Thailand





CHAPTER XXXI Bangkok Quarantine


Mid-December 2020, Bangkok


Day 0 – Arrival Day


As for how the Thais dealt with Covid, I can’t account for the whole country, but I am happy to describe how they dealt with visitors arriving at the airport, at this point in the ongoing saga. I was favourably impressed, on the whole.

It was phenomenally well organised. Just after leaving the plane (which was about half full), we came to a long corridor with rows and rows of chairs, spaced far apart. There were dozens of employees in full safety-suits head to toe, mask and hairnet and face shield and maybe more. If it were not for air-conditioning, this would have been very uncomfortable. Maybe it was, anyway.

Every step of the way, there were helpers like these pointing and steering, some holding signs in many languages. They were gentle and kindly, and those with clear face shields were smiling. They were also numerous. There was absolutely no way you were going anywhere but where they pointed you. Gentle but firm control, and no exceptions.

You were sent to a chair, given a number badge which corresponded to the master list of all those arriving, which most of those helpers had in hand – who was going to which hotel, etc. (More on which hotels later: that was tightly controlled too – you couldn’t just go anywhere. You go to one of the officially approved places where they keep a damned good eye on you, or they don’t let you in in the first place.)

By now, you’ve already accepted the idea that a quarantine is worthless unless it’s meticulously thorough.

Temperatures were taken, and there was loads of paperwork to be checked. If you hadn’t done this paperwork, you’d never have boarded the plane. There were also written questionnaires about symptoms, which you signed. These had warnings about signing falsely or not reporting symptoms – but I do not know what the penalty was.

You also wouldn’t be here if you had not signed documents promising to obey whatever health authorities told you to do. But I saw nothing objectionable in what they outlined or asked for, so far. Personally, I felt safer.

To board the plane, you needed to present (besides the usual):

1.Negative Covid test, done less than seventy-two hours before departure

2.Doctor’s note confirming the above and detailing that you have no symptoms, also no more than seventy-two hours old

3.Health insurance (I had to upgrade mine)

4.Hotel confirmation for the two-week quarantine as directed

5.A signed “I have no symptoms” testimonial

6.An agreement to wear a mask on the plane, sanitise regularly and do as staff direct – according to Thai national criteria

7.A Certificate of Entry, confirming the above and so much more.

In the terminal, if people stood too close, a member of staff gently gestured them apart. But very few needed reminding. Also, if you touched anything, someone appeared to provide a squirt of hand sanitiser. Bottles of it were at every turn, as were safety lists in several languages.

At passport control, when the person in front of you was done, someone subtly and swiftly swooped in, sanitised the whole area, then beckoned you forward. This was going on all over the place. There were people cleaning surfaces everywhere you looked. There seemed to be way more staff than visitors. I know that tourism is down hugely here, but this sort of employment might be on the up.

Before I left Budapest, I’d written to the hotel about how to find the shuttle bus, how to do this and that, but I really should have known better than to ask, because it was all arranged, every detail. The moment I emerged, a polite smiling guy saw my number-tag, waved his sign with my name on it, and took me to the bus.

At the hotel, a friendly lady behind a thick Plexiglas screen walked me through the programme for the next two weeks and helped me choose all of tomorrow’s meals. The resident nurse, also safely screened away, explained all the medical checks coming my way. All of this took place outdoors.

I was shown to my room, and a very nice dinner was delivered a few hours later. I had a welcome package of gloves, masks, sanitiser, free local SIM card, an appointment to be tested again in a couple of days, and again after that twice more, plus there was a long printed list of (all reasonable) Dos and Don’ts.

All of this – meaning an en suite room, meals, laundry service, medical attention, TV and aircon – was mine for a daily price much less than a cheap room in the UK, even a crummy one in a remote area.

Also, there was a rather lovely menu of Thai, Japanese and Western offerings.





Day 7 of 15


On Day 7, I was summoned for a Covid test. By summoned, I mean that I was asked to use a certain route down the hallway to a certain lift which went down to the garden area.

Outside the lift was a sort of receiving line of people in protective gear who led me to a table with a large piece of Plexiglas shielding the nurse behind it. He did two tests. One was a simple swab across the tongue, and the other was a swab just a little bit up the nose. I was spared the kind of nasal tube which people say feels like it’s burrowing to the back of your brain and can be painful. I can see why that might be quite a drag. Even momentary pain is one of my extreme cowardice areas. I’ve had enough of that in my medical history, and it’s a sore point in all senses of the phrase. This was nothing.

The next day, outside my door was an envelope containing a nice message about my negative test, and a pink wristband that would allow me garden privileges, twice a day, for an hour each time.

They only allowed twenty people outside at a time, so one had to sign up, competing for the afternoon and not the less popular early morning slots. The grounds were large and flowery and pretty, and there was a pleasant circular route for the walkers and joggers.

I sat and talked to Scottish Ann from Aberdeen, here visiting her son who had married a Thai lady, and next week she would be going up north to stay with them for a few months, as she does each year. I am not complaining about video calls being the mainstay of communications these days, but seeing people in the flesh is preferable, to say the least. Very nice lady, very nice chat.

It’s also after you test negative that the cleaners come and make up your room. There’s another test on Day 12 or so.

If you test positive, they take you and your belongings to the nearest hospital. Every approved hotel is already linked to a hospital that is ready for you.

The nurse comes back two more times, to check blood pressure, temperature and a few other basics.

As for food, it was ridiculously lovely and I indulged in full-on gluttony. Every day, you type in your choices to their app, and every day, beautiful things are delivered to your door. Plus, room service is at the ready with more choices and quite an extensive selection of alcohol – by the glass, by the bottle, in imaginative cocktails – you name it.

The rules, to me, were all reasonable:

You really must stay in your room for the first week until the first negative test. After that you can go out when and where allowed, in mask and sandals, and using hand sanitiser at key intersections.

You are provided with a thermometer and a link to an app where you send in a photo of your temperature twice a day. If you forget, someone phones and politely reminds you. I know how to say “Sorry, I forgot!” in Thai and the caller laughs sweetly and says, “Please go do now.” Then she replies with an animated sticker where a cartoon rabbit dances, flings flowers about and says thank you.

Rather disturbing was the rule “Do not spit or blow your nose on the floor”. People do that?! Even in the shower, I mean, yech!

No outside foods are allowed in “except personal necessities only”, which is an interestingly grey area. You can order from room service – which is great and has a huge choice, but of course pricier than average, even with the Covid guests’ discount. Here I will admit, I knew they would not be stocking walnuts, dates or pretzels, and I smuggled in a bag of each. It’s a personal sanity thing, therefore a personal necessity! Please do not report me.

It’s said that for every time zone you cross, it takes a day to shift over to the new time zone. I find that to be true. So it had now been a week and I was kind of sleeping at the right time; a basic alertness had returned after a week of mental fog – not unpleasant, just a thick, stupid, sleepy daze. Now I was capable of thinking, and even thinking ahead a bit.

Any downsides?

They used a hideous amount of plastic, with everything and especially with food. But a Swiss guy wrote to the manager and persuaded him to promise to switch to all metal cutlery, as of next week, and a few other changes too. (This promise evaporated.)

It was boring at times. The movies were not the best. Fortunately, I had work and loads of books and projects.

The view was… interesting. It was a sort of slum among garbage floating in a fluorescent green swamp.

And that’s it.



Thailand’s Covid case numbers were not quite as low as in Taiwan, Vietnam or New Zealand, but the numbers in all of these places have been dramatically lower than almost anywhere on earth, proportionately. I reckon this may be true even after factoring in the possibility of real numbers being higher than official ones. There are loads of theories about why they succeeded, but I’ll leave that debate for the moment.

So far in my lifetime, overall, I’ve had a ton of ill health and also some freaky accidents, so I certainly feel lucky to be alive at all. These days, I can double if not triple that gratitude factor.





Day 9 of 15


An amusing sort of boredom was setting in, in our luxury prison. I finally finagled time in the garden in the afternoon in the sought-after 4pm slot. I spoke Thai to the lady with the clipboard, and this always gains one a few points. There were two forms of entertainment out there. There was a singer with a keyboard accompanist. There were also what you might call anthropological observations to be collected.

First, the musical playlist:

‘Smooth Operator’

‘Simply the Best’

‘I’m Your Venus’

A few contemporary-sounding things that made me realise I am stupidly out of touch with almost all pop music

Two numbers I didn’t know, but I deduced the titles were probably ‘What Took You So Long’ and ‘I Like The Nightlife’

They finished with ‘YMCA’ – and yes, some people did the arm-dance. Sure, I did too.



About social anthropology: it stands to reason that, when abroad, foreigners congregate according to language. This was very plain here. Our groupings were:

Big, fat, sweaty, shirtless old white guys, speaking German to each other and English to whoever they could trap

Some Japanese ladies, not speaking much at all, to anyone

A dozen Asian men, talking only to each other

Then there was me. Ann, the only other white lady pensioner, must have been on another shift.



More details:

Group A were terrible at social distancing, with each other and the rest of us. They spoke to everyone whether this was wanted or not. Also, I’ve decided that besides the two-metre rule, we should add more for the fragrance factor.

They approached people, who recoiled and stepped back. They surged forward, and the same thing happened again, like a reluctant, awkward dance. Most of their victims were too polite. They even bothered me, and that’s crazy because Group B were cute and young.

Group B were fantastically good at socially distancing from Group A.

Group C were chattering to each other non-stop. For a while, I could not determine their language because each time I walked by, they clammed up and only resumed when I was out of earshot. I finally worked out they were Thai. Now it made sense. If they knew I understood some Thai and wanted privacy, I’d respect that. The irony was that I understood very little and they could have gossiped freely.

I went round in circles, up and down stairs, over and over. At the end of our precious hour, we were all squirted with hand sanitiser, as we lined up for the lift to our rooms. Group A had to be constantly reminded that only so many people should go into the lift at one time. They kept trying to join the women (even little old me), all of whom clearly wanted distance. Their tactic was to gallantly announce “Ladies first!” and then try to follow you in, leering and winking at observers.

“Fuck off” was not actually stated, but was written across every female face there. The guys either did not notice or found it funny. Thank heavens for the diplomatic staff.





Thoughts on Tattoos: a Detour to New Orleans


The poolside here had more tattooed skin than not. I was seeing huge swathes of it. I’ve heard it rumoured that Great Britain and New Zealand are the most tattooed nations on earth. I don’t know, but it’s a big business here. There’s medical tourism and ancestry tourism. This must be tattoo tourism.

Tattoos are no big deal nowadays, but they were comparatively unusual decades ago. I was only tempted once, but in an iconic, classic way. I was young and drunk in New Orleans (See? Classic. Iconic), and on my way home one evening. I’d been thinking about adding a row of piercings all around one ear, but was turned away from the first place I went to.

They were too cool for this. The guy sneered at me, said, “We don’t do ears,” and turned his back. He had nearly everything pierced except his ears. I was so uncool.

So I staggered down Bourbon Street – and yes, of course it was that street and none other: classic, iconic. I noticed a tattoo place which at the time seemed a reasonable alternative. I swayed and tried to focus on all the illustrations in the window. I thought I might like a bunch of grapes as my image, but was undecided about the anatomical location. While dithering, my eyes were drawn to a hand-scribbled sign that said, “Piercings, $5 per ear or whatever”.

Excellent. I went in, handed over a twenty and had four added, all around one ear.

That was my style which jangled away for many years. A series of hoops, in different sizes, started with the largest at the lobe, tiny at the top, and just on one ear, a conventional single on the other. Then, unexpectedly, over twenty years later, I went to a Buddhist retreat for a few weeks, and was very surprised when all these areas got infected after decades of trouble-free jangling. This was all except the first two conventional ones, left and right, that I was allowed as a teen.

I did everything you can do to discourage an infection, but nothing worked and it worsened. After a while, there was only one thing to do, which was to remove them. It felt better almost immediately, and soon everything closed and healed quickly. The ears spoke and I listened. I never understood why they suddenly complained after all those years, but it was the end of an era.

One each rules to this day.

And no tattoos.

Here in Thailand, I was surrounded by people festooned with tattoos, many with slogans in foreign scripts, which of course are infamous for not saying what you think they’re saying. Back then, I wanted no slogans in New Orleans. I could have lived with the grapes. Or whatever. But that’s all ink downriver now.



Looking ahead was a final word from Andreas:

I am pleased that you are keeping the apartment in Budapest [with caretaker]. So I hope a little more that we will meet again.

Yes it’s a shame you didn’t find me until I had such serious problems, but it was a late present for me that you showed up. But maybe we can still catch up a lot in 2021!

And, on “your” island the sky is blue, and the monkeys are already harvesting the coconuts in the palm trees!



In love, your cousin Andreas.





CHAPTER XXXII Return to The Hut


December 2020, Week 4


Quarantine was over and I left Bangkok, released from their hotel jail – a jail with smiling nurses, tasty room service and lots of movies. They gave me a letter of health, two roses and a charming entreaty for some feedback, which was positive in every sense except medical. I was clean and Covid-negative.

I was dismayed at my two heavy suitcases, which would not be easy later on the rickety boat gangplank with only one side rail. The really heavy one was the small one, containing books and papers. My Italian friends consistently joked that their second suitcases were always full of food, but mine had books. However, as usual, the Thai postal service at the airport easily boxed it up and sent it ahead for a pittance and with pleasant service. It would appear on my steps in a few days.

Meanwhile, at the airport, why had I been concerned about finding a cashpoint? It was the first thing I came across inside the entrance. Have I learned nothing about Thai excellence in business and marketing? I corrected myself and grabbed enough cash for my first week or two back home, where getting to a cashpoint was a bit of an excursion.

“Home” – I said Home, with a happy sigh. Half my life had taken place here over the last nearly twenty years. There was that much sweet familiarity. This was home enough for me.

Today’s sojourn was through Bangkok’s largest airport, Suvarnabhumi. Three-quarters of that massive place was cordoned off and deserted. Covid did that to travelling. The acoustic was quiet, echoey and eerie. The mood of most passengers, mostly white, was impatient and they were completely unwilling to keep any distance between themselves and others. It was a sort of battlefield. Behaviour was sharply divided along extremely clichéd lines. Asians were calm, aware of others, considerate and patient. Europeans were bratty, pushy and invasive.

One guy stepped into the space I’d left in front of me. I called, “Hello!” and he scowled and moved behind me. Then I made friendly chit-chat with him about his golf clubs, which seemed to irritate him; therefore, I continued deliberately, just a little. He spent the next half hour sneaking up on me but backing off when I turned and looked. He wasn’t playing. He was seriously annoyed. It was the misbehaviour you see in kindergartens and monkey cages. Middle-class people were panicking and clutching at their toys, the way people run from fires holding vases or golf clubs.

The flight was short, memorable for how tightly we were crushed in like sardines, landing with the distinct fragrance of stale air that’s been inhaled for an hour by every single lung. Normally this is not relevant. However, the near-non-existence of the latest virus here was reassuring. For now.





I’m from Eritrea


Another inspection preceded entry into the terminal (outdoor, under cover, open sides). Passing the gate required a smartphone accompanied by a smart user. I had one of those but not both. The snag that followed was not my fault, I swear.

Before, when I checked in, the nice lady did her best to add the required app to my phone, which she said I needed, but the phone did not want to know. It was part of a Covid-related We Know Where You Are thing, which was fine by me.

The snag came later at the arrival gate. Everyone else photographed the Splodge (QR) Code, which took their data, but I could not. Here another nice lady took my details manually. This was fine until she asked about my passport, which was UK. Unfortunately, there was no UK on her list, no Great Britain, no Britain, no England, no Scotland, nothing close, and we looked thoroughly, both of us.

She offered me Unknown or United Nations, but I didn’t know what to say. She spun her wheel of fortune, stabbed at random and declared me from Eritrea. I had to look it up. It’s near Sudan, Ethiopia and the Red Sea. If anyone tries to connect me to this nation, it could become interesting.

At that point, I was almost home anyway. No more boats, just nice firm ground on a sandy island, for a while. None of the dreaded three Cs.





Yet Another Con


Over the years, as I came and went from the island to the city, I varied the route. There was always, to my annoyance, some port town or other along the way, where rip-off merchants added insults to their trade. This time the con was a bit sleeker, and it was not a Thai con but Russian.

The airport ran an inexpensive shared shuttle service, but the clerk could not find the name of my guesthouse, booked online. She did a search, wrote some other name on my ticket, and I wondered if yet again if I was to be dumped vaguely near my destination but not quite there and no clear way to get there. This has happened before.

I arrived at a reception that had no record of my reservation. It was a complex of ten or fifteen apartment buildings, clearly marked as long-lease and with no daily rate. Not a hotel? Confusing. I showed my reservation papers and it was their address but not them. They phoned the number, had an awkward chat, and soon a stone-faced white guy arrived to drive me to the flat, which was indeed in this complex. This was an unpopular move. He’d rented a whole block and now secretly sublet it for far more, which owners, of course, do not like. I didn’t know, and later apologised to the receptionists. They were gracious about it, and agreed the problem was him and not me. I’d rather the Thais got the rent money, given the choice.



I met a pleasant Thai cabbie, who wanted to practise and improve his English. We chatted about loads of things. He and his wife wanted to wait to have kids because they were scared about money. I was his only fare all week. He said he thought the tourists would be back, but only after two or three years. The Europeans had enough problems back home, without trying to come here too, he reckoned. It’s always impressive when people are cool under pressure and fear.

It was spooky how quiet things were. A port town usually has some activity. Not now. All the many bars, nightclubs, tattoo parlours and other Hello Sailor entertainments were shuttered up and dusty, had been for nearly a year. Even a non-sexy entertainment like food was hard to find.

Of all the closed restaurants, the saddest were those along the seafront, where they’d piled up all the furniture and equipment on the balcony, open to the air, there for the taking if anyone wanted these things, which clearly no one did. In another year, this would be vile rubbish that’s hard to clear. And where does rubbish go, on an island? You can only burn so much. You can’t throw it away. There is no “away”.

One had to take the long view and be hopeful yet realistic, like the cabbie. Yes, I tipped big. I also intended to do that more regularly. That just became policy. Domestic economic policy.





The Boat Home


There had been a few days of ferocious weather, danger at sea and possible boat cancellations, all stomach-turning to think of. Magically, the bad weather left as quickly as it came. Today, suddenly the sea was glassy calm, the sun not too hot, and good fortune sailed with me back to Mai Island.

In the nearly twenty years I’ve come and gone from this place, there have been times I’ve wept or jumped for joy or sang out my happiness on seeing that familiar pier once again. This time I felt only relief, a very strong, deep and blessed relief to be home, to feel safe and to know my next sleep would be in a familiar bed.

Everyday customs had changed. There were squirty bottles of hand sanitiser everywhere, at every cashier, and ways to check temperature. This was done before boarding any boat, before going into many shops. But life here tended to be lived outdoors, and was almost always breezy – a huge advantage from many points of view.

Twenty minutes later, we were bumping up the old rocky, rutted track, unloading me at The Hut. Again, I felt a tremendous surge of relief to be back. That’s probably what defines Home – where you sleep well, feeling safe and sound and relieved.





The Jungle Garden


The garden was very trim. Mr L had been through the entire place with the strimmer, impressively so. All I had to do was drag the palm fronds to the fire pit. Or not. I could be lazy and let Mother Nature do her own composting. Top choice was to stack their heavy spines to create terracing.

The path was totally clear! That had never been the case before. This was an unprecedented and extra warm welcome back from Mr L. What’s more, the final segment of concrete had been laid on the path to my place! This was historic. Between the stony track and my front steps, there used to be a dusty dirt path that turned into a cruddy muddy river, depending on the weather. Then came the vision to pave it, which manifested itself in five stages, over many more years: every time they had a little concrete spare from another project, they laid another metre or two. Today saw completion. It was ragged, simple and bicycle-friendly. It was a beauty.





The Hut


The good old front steps-more-like-a-ladder were gooey and sticky and badly needed a scrub. The dog-net was removed to allow access to the balcony, which was in even worse need of a scrub due to gecko pee and more – ten months of it.



Inside The Hut, it was thoroughly filthy, even more than usual. I’d never been away this long. My regular readers asked – with no prompting on my part – about the annual lizard shit clearance. It was a ritual. This year there was plenty of substance on that theme.

Depending on your view, it was either as Mother Nature intended, or appallingly filthy: theatrical cobwebs, thick dust, a carpet of dead spiders marinated in gecko wee, and lumps of kack around the edges and over most of downstairs.

Just think camping. It’s the only way.

First there were snake checks to do: behind the desk or clothes chest or behind anywhere, obviously and iconically under the bed, or anything like a nest or cover. In the early days I copied horror movies, but then I watched Mr L do his snake checks.

You move slowly and make gentle but clear little thumps, gently murmuring and hinting to them with gentle sounds which are near but respectfully restrained. You wait before making any move, like the next little hello-thump. Also, you leave them an escape route, of course. By the way, Mr L also always carried a whacking great knife on the end of a long pole in these situations.

More things to check:

Rats under the fridge? No.

Geckos frozen inside the fridge? No. There was something tragic about that. The tiny ones could easily sneak in unnoticed. Later, it’s horrible peeling frozen geckos off your courgettes.

Then, it was a matter of clearing narrow lanes to key areas.

I swept, scrubbed and mopped a narrow path from the front door, through the one and only room, then down the stairs to the kitchen and shower area.

The right fork branched to the fridge, one-burner stove and, finally, to the shutters of the Wilma Flintstone outdoor tap and rock, i.e. dishwashing area.

The left fork led to the toilet (heavily communal now) and shower.

I had flip flops and rubber gloves on at all times. Three garbage pails of laundry were soon soaking: dark, light or wanted for tomorrow.

Overall, in terms of first impressions after being away a long time, I was wrong about one thing. I thought I’d made a good dent in getting rid of clutter. There was still too much. I foresaw a lot of it going on the bonfire. A seasonal goal was born.





Neighbourly Gifts, Flora and Fauna Update


On my return, I trotted next door and gave Mr and Mrs L gifts of European cookies and whisky. They gave me fresh local bananas and papayas – local meaning from a tree right in front of me. Mr L complained that birds and giant squirrels got the papayas near my balcony. He hates those squirrels. They’re massive, vandalising, thieving thugs and not cute.

The lemon tree was heaving with fruit, and they’d left most for me. The custard apple tree – a birthday gift to me when it was small – was finally taller than I am and looking stronger. Other seasons awaiting were mango, cashew, coconut, pineapple, rambutan and Thai things I often forget the name of.

On the veg front, later that day, Mrs L was squatting down in the work area, tying up bundles of sataw beans in their long, twisted pods. The English name was bitter stink beans – for good reason. Each bean was as fat as your thumb. Mrs L counted every one of them, and prepared the bundles accordingly. These were to be slung into her motorbike basket, and off to the village weekly market she’d go. They have a short season, so now was the time.

It sounded simple enough, unless you saw the very tall tree they dangle from, the five-metre shaky bamboo ladder against it with Mrs L at the bottom and Mr L at the top holding a four-metre bamboo pole with a nasty big knife tied to the end, all of this happening over craggy boulders that would break your bones if you fell. This is how they fetch them. I couldn’t even watch.

Traditionally, these beans are stir-fried with pork. Their texture is a bit like lima beans. I wished her well at market and hoped never to eat them again. With respect.





Annual Rituals


In the morning first thing, I dropped off the old sheets and towels (yes, speckled with gecko droppings) after shaking the bits off, and we stuffed them into the washing machine. They’d be on the line before noon, and dry by evening. I was given a fresh set, with a cute new pillow cover in red cotton, Santa and reindeer theme on the tag – always funny in a hot place.





Water Issues


Get the kettle on! This was urgent. There was no drinking water in the place, least of all in the pipes. Tap water was fine for those born and bred here, but many locals boiled it too. I did this anyway, anywhere. After what I’ve read, across the world, and what I imagine cannot be read, I take this caution every place I go.

With respect.

Here, it was rainwater collected in a big tank that came to my house directly in a pipe. No filtration, no treatment of any kind.

As a side story, what’s creepy is when a building crew works on houses uphill. I do not know what they dump into the earth, but sometimes my shower leaves a burning feeling head to toe, which goes away gradually a few days and a few showers down the line, or maybe downriver is the thing to say. This is disturbing, and only a theory, but it is not a far-fetched theory in the least, considering what I know about typical practices around here – and indeed many places.

This is also why I stopped gardening, except in pots.

As for today, I boiled two kettles, drank what I had on me, which was not enough, opened some fruit juice and wondered about it being a few months past its sell-by date. It smelled fine. I decided to live dangerously. In a few hours, the boiled stuff would be room temperature, ready for the fridge and the ice cube tray. Then I’d boil more, because there is never enough in a sweaty place. I’d forgotten these habits you need in the heat if you don’t want to keel over – which can, and has, happened.



After my morning arrival, I cleaned all day like a maniac, until I could not lift an aching muscle. I sweated and drank and sweated and cleaned and on and on. There would be more days like this. Then I showered as thoroughly as a person can do, and rested on the balcony, rocking in the hammock, with dripping clean hair and a not very cool drink – no ice yet, but some coming tomorrow.

The main road was not far and, since they’d taken so many trees down, traffic noise carried all too well. In high season, it could be a drag strip of boy-racers. Not now. It was crazily quiet, compared to how heaving it usually was this time of year. Some family businesses made most of their yearly income in December and January. This year instead there was peace and quiet. And nervousness, for those needing the tourist trade.

It was time to walk the totally flat bike to town, fill the tyres with air, and take my baskets to market.





The Village Sunday Market


It was a good day to arrive. I was a devoted regular, and glad to resume my routine. This settled dinner questions, the empty fridge at home and gossip all in one visit. It was purely a question of how much could be heaped on the bike. I was reminded afresh of the bag-lady style in which the back basket was roped on with miscellaneous scraps of twine in garish contrasting colours.

I brought shopping bags and plastic containers, and a willingness to shop when hungry and buy too much to drag home. There were also things to buy and eat right then and there, on the pier, alongside many others.

Today the market entrance was gated and patrolled by old women who insisted you wear a mask, checked your temperature and gave you a squirt of hand sanitiser. They wore matching shirts and looked like the usual temple and community mother and grandmother volunteers. Mrs L was at the other gate, and was here every time. She was a strong member of that group. She wouldn’t miss it for anything. A pillar of the village community.

I found my usuals: Ay the sushi guy, Boom with mangos and sticky rice, Boom’s grandma with dim sum, the old friend chicken couple so shy I never asked their names, and the new curry girl who was very busy. There was no one with fried bananas and sweet potatoes, but that’ll change, no doubt.

As for fruit and vegetables, I bought them last, to place them on top of the other stuff. Priority stalls were first to try Mrs Toothy, because I liked her, and her husband died last year so she was down and needed the business. If she was not there, next choice was Mrs Cute Roundface and Son. If not, it was Big Mama Burma and her motorcycle sidecar. In any case, the vegetable list was: yard-long green beans (I’ve grown those!), weird cabbage, any third green thing – the more unfamilar, the better. Maybe also tiny round white sweet aubergines, little oval tomatoes, mild garlic – lots of it – and a few plain onions.

Fruit: Mr L had already slung bananas and papayas at me, so a third variety was wanted, like a mango, dragonfruit or something new and unpronounceable.

As a last act, I usually weakened for a treat like a cute cake. The pier was speckled with people, snacks, kids, dogs. All in the open air. What a blessing. My heart went out to those bound by the cold.

I spoke to one optimistic neighbour, with a restaurant, who said the village was about the same. That’s not what I saw. Maybe that one neighbour was OK or even bluffing, but many were not OK at all. “Same-same but different,” they often say, but this time it’s not in the good way. There were no boats at the pier, no divers, no fishing boats, not one, and I’d never seen that once in twenty years. Out on the horizon, though, some squid boats were out, so at least that was still happening. They did masses of exports so, with luck, a lack of tourists will not hurt them as much.

In the village, many small shops had closed. Some of the faces at the market seemed depressed, without the usual bubbly chit-chat, which some had been peddling there for over two decades – and their parents before that.

One family said they had enough savings to survive until the summer, but after that they were worried. They had extended family back-up, in a pinch, but not everyone enjoyed that. In truth, some people looked more nervous than others. I was tipping well all over the place, enjoying the new policy. I was buying more than I needed. The policy was now even expanding.

That was also when I remembered why Thais do not have the same “How are you?” ritual greetings as the English, in which the English most certainly do not tell each other how they are. Far from it! You both say you’re fine, those are the lyrics to the song, and no one changes any of the wording. By contrast, Thais greet you by wishing you well. If they were to ask how you are, and if things were bad, that might be like rubbing salt in the wound. It could be really rude and cruel to ask someone how they are. Early on, I made the mistake of asking one lady how she was, then quickly saw it was a painful reminder to her. A mistake on my part. That lesson sank in quickly.

I needed to switch habits. I stopped asking people how they were, and simply wished them well. It does make more sense, after all.

A few magic items:

I saw Great Cook Ew and humorous helper Maum at the Nong M restaurant – my usual. They had, like every year, literally counted the days, our old game. Things were delightfully back to normal.

There was in me a sea change, my own versions of “same-same but different”. Habits were substantially different in one regard: I was a much better tipper. More money, and more often. I found many small ways to quietly donate to groups or give gifts to friends. I also realised that however nervous you are about your future security, if you have anything at all, you can be a big tipper in your will, if you have one. That’s how I upped my sharing with those who have less. I might know them and I might not, but if they have less, then that’s where I share. That was my best accomplishment this year, that change of policy.

As a final treat, there’s nothing like finding the perfect knife. At the Sunday market, I saw and bought a new prah (aka billhook, machete, curved wonder). My last one literally flew off the handle routinely, held on by mere pressure and sweetly mocked by Mr and Mrs L. But, this one had the little hole to let you screw it to the handle. Perfection. Mr L would do the rest. Now I was ready!





My First Night Back in the Magic Tent


I was exhausted, and more than ready to crawl under the mosquito net, which of course was also the magic safety fortress. I missed my safety net whenever I was away from here. Here I enjoyed dreaming ahead to the morning, when at first, I’ll have no idea where I am, or even when or what or who I am. And so, Hut life resumed as normal.





Icky Fauna Report


So far, I’d heard no singing tokay lizards but I was on alert. I had sluiced away substantial evidence, so I knew they were here somewhere. Perhaps they were asleep, or Sir is not mating at present. It’s the boys that do that famous mating call which sounds like a cuckoo bird, a silly horny lonely little cuckoo bird that in fact is a lizard.

Lately, there was a riddle in the loft. In the triangular spirit of scissors, paper, stone, we had the usual local combination of lizard, rat, snake. Obviously, I favoured lizards as housemates. They ate mosquitoes, they had no teeth to worry about and they sang silly songs like teenage boys in love whose voices cracked like cuckoo birds. I liked them but didn’t see one in residence at the moment. That was a first. I didn’t like that. That left the roof-space wide open to other species making encampments. This meant rats or snakes, the main contenders.

On the side balcony, while hanging laundry, I saw something scurry into the kitchen roof. It was a young giant squirrel, a future thug, the kind Mr L hates so much. It ran past me within inches, without a blink, confident little brat. Will he rule the roost? That was the bungalow’s question. I hoped not. Mr L would be very displeased, and that might mean war.

But, a few days later, after a small battle of two of us thumping the wall in the night, I think the roof-squirrel departed. There was silence for a few days, then finally I saw a welcome sight – a big fat tokay lizard, on the wall, looking at home.

What a relief to be among friends.





End of the Year


It’s been said that if you move around a lot, you may feel a bit homesick for everywhere, all the time. That may be true and it’s rather sweet, if you’ve had a lot of the nomadic life. Yes, I do feel a little homesick for everywhere. But also, I can make myself at home in many places.

On that last day of 2020, in The Hut, I was relieved it had been declared a hermit’s evening. Friends agreed to meet next week, in the new year. I’d be ready to emerge from my cave by then. I felt I needed to be ready for anything when I thought of a new year ahead.

In truth, deep down, I was looking forward to the coming year, despite what had happened in the last one.

After all, how many more surprises can there be?





CHAPTER XXXIII Postscript


Spring 2021


I’d been wondering and wondering about Lujza Szende [my second cousin, two generations removed – one of Miksa’s four girls], and her husband Sandor Nagy. Whatever happened to their son Tamas? I found something. After much hunting and clever detective work, I found more Hungarian cousins, descendants of Tamas, a cluster of them here. One of these cousins wrote back. Here it got funnier, or ironic, or awful – depending on your view. He explained:

Lujza had a great impact on my grandfather Tamas, because he found the Communist Manifesto in her cupboard, and Tamas was the first Hungarian who translated Marx’s Das Capital into Hungarian.

Please let me add, it’s neither Marx’s nor Tamas’s fault what happened in Hungary later on. Also, Lujza went to Vienna to study Freud and Montessori, in their early days. I’m on her trail.


About Oszkar Szives, born Stark: this was the youngest of five, who went to court for fraud at age 25 but perhaps was bailed out by an older brother, and that’s about all we knew. We later learned that he died age 41 of TB, in 1939. Born Jewish, he was declared Catholic by his widow, on the death certificate.


On a sad note, we said goodbye to extra special Szandra from the Jewish Family Research Centre in Budapest, who died earlier this year. She helped me and many others a great deal. She will be sorely missed. I saw her just before the Covid lockdown. We meant to have lunch but never did. We meant to jump over the boundary of work and talk a bit more, just as people, maybe new friends, but we never got the chance. There’s a stark reminder in that.

Seize the day and do it now, whatever it is. Take someone out for coffee and strudel, just as one example.

Meanwhile, research continues.

*** END OF THIS TEXT Nothing Went to Plan And Other ***