Title: Noodle Trails 2: My Secret Century in Budapest  
Author:Eileen kay 
Gender of Author:Female 
Publication Year:2019
Publisher:Sabre Books London
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2019
Publisher of the Edition Used:Sabre Books London
Index Number: B098
Source Link:https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07SR9ZDQT?notRedirectToSDP=1&ref_=dbs_mng_calw_1&storeType=ebooks 

*** START OF THIS TEXT Noodle Trails 2: My Secret Century in Budapest ***


INTRODUCTION
Summer 2016

A challenge began, as I looked forward to celebrating my sixtieth year on this planet. The project was to spend some time and even some cash on researching our family tree – in particular, our family mystery. We knew almost nothing about our dad’s side, the Hungarians. A few cousins vaguely remembered grandparents Eugene and Anna, but they were too young at the time to remember very much. Most of us had never met them. To me, they existed only in a few photos and a lot of frustrated curiosity. All reports agreed: Granddad never said a thing about his previous life nor did Grandma, and you didn’t ask. He was kindly, tight-lipped and evasive. She was scary, explosive and evasive.

Dad was phenomenally evasive too, so I grew more curious – obviously. I wondered what crime had been committed. In 1906 when Granddad emigrated, it was too early for Fascists, Communists or Nazis. I could not understand. Then at university, I had a chance to travel with friends to Europe; the first time I’d been anywhere. The beautiful plan was to fly to Paris and spend the holidays as a group there, split up for a while, join up again at the end and return home. My own plan was to see Budapest, our ancestors’ home, and maybe learn about my grandparents.

I phoned to ask Mom to ask Dad, because that was the format. She returned the call later, sounding upset. She’d been crying. He’d thrown one of his rages. She asked me never to ask such questions again. Later, carefully and slowly, I prised the real reason out of my reluctant but malleable mother. She said the tipping point for his anger was that I’d asked about church records. He’d exploded, and issued a total ban. Mom hated saying it – she whispered it to me with a shudder – but Granddad may have been Jewish. It was an ugly tone, like they were ashamed of this. Instead, I was ashamed of them.

For all their good points, they were not prepared for the 1960s.

For me, its ethos of peace and harmony, truth and justice, across borders, was embedded in the entire fabric of my childhood. The idea of mixed blood was great news. Now besides all the other arguing, I could argue that the Catholicism so violently inflicted on me was not as inevitable as they’d implied. My rebellion and leave-taking were perfectly logical now. I could choose; it was not decreed by blood. Plus, the Jewish kids at school were always the smartest and funniest. It blended perfectly into the melting pot of a flower child’s idealism.

However, my mother was serious and firm, and scared of more rages. I was told again to shut up about it, forever. So I did, but only for forty years. My own age group is more open-hearted, I’m relieved to say, as are younger generations. Dad led Mom with paranoia and hostility: against blacks, browns, yellows, reds, and plenty of whites too: Italians, Polish… and held a special contempt for Jews – allegedly the race of half his blood. I decided from Dad’s original tantrum that smoke meant fire. Granddad had to have been Jewish. Why else would the strict Christians hide him? These rumours did not impress my Jewish friends. They emphasised this was not proven, or even provable. They sounded miffed: it was their drama and they were not sharing it. True, I was not raised in their faith. In fact, I was looking forward to an adulthood involving no group ritual at all. Still, blood is blood and facts are facts. I liked facts. If a story is concealed, I want the truth. With this story, I lacked facts and truth, until now.

Meanwhile, as a young undergraduate in the late 1970s, I went to Budapest anyway and had a great time. I couldn’t look up anyone or anything, and couldn’t have afforded any helpers such as genealogy researchers or translators. But I loved the place. I thought it was an astoundingly beautiful city, even its shabbiness. It was big enough to be interesting and small enough to be walkable. Everything was exotic and fascinating. I ate too much and proudly gained a lot of weight. I made some friends in a cool little circle of art teachers, heard many styles of great music, went to dance clubs, did the sights you only ever have to do once, and vowed to come back – someday.

Forty years later, in 2017, I did go back. For my once-only, lifetime achievement award and sixtieth birthday, I turned to my bucket list, thinking there were no burning issues in there, but there were:

Become a wealthy philanthropist who gives hundreds of towns new hospitals and a hundred years of money to run them (failed).

Find Granddad’s family. Get to the truth of who they were. Publish their stories (done now).

Take a camper-van tour all over the UK and thank everyone I can (still possible).



Plan B it was. I joined all the recommended websites (see appendix) and started chiselling away. If the idea grabs you, I encourage you, but not all of you. Only one nut is needed per extended clan, and many can dine out on the stories uncovered.

You can build a lot from three small facts. Your identity in the world depends on your full name, birth date and birthplace. It’s amazing what you can find with only that. Add your parents’ names and even more can be found.

I had this, but not much more, for Grandpa Eugene and Grandma Anna. Mom finally gave in to my gentle but unrelenting pressure. She quietly stole the information from Dad’s file while he was at work on the condition I always kept that fact from him. For each, she had a full name, birth date and birthplace. She also had the first names of Eugene’s parents. There was not much else. However, from those scraps came the saga – and sometimes soap opera – you now hold.

In practical terms, I did what many people do. I joined Ancestry.com during one of its two-week free-trial offers. I timed those two weeks to coincide with some unemployment and gave it my all. I built a family tree and downloaded every document I could lay my hands on: ships’ manifests, US census documents, military registrations, social security matters, and more. Facts started piling up nicely.

Although we were painfully short on photographs, a vivid mental picture did begin to emerge. This was all from the New York point of view. They both started from different parts of Hungary, and the record of Anna’s ocean crossing surfaced first.

This was the launch.



Note: At this point, let me say that this book will employ a general abandonment of Hungarian accents and other diacritical marks to make many things easier – with apologies to my Hungarian friends.





CHAPTER I From Budapest to the Bronx, 1905–1906



Anna and Eugene left Hungary separately when they were young and met in New York.

How did they get there? I couldn’t find Eugene, but Anna Dudas (pronounced DU-dash) left her tiny farming village in the rural northeast, Radvany, and sailed for New York in 1905. I expected to learn about hideous conditions in steerage or third class. But it turned out she went second class, so it wasn’t as desperate as for some. First-hand accounts of travel in third class were stomach-churning, filled with filth and rape. At least Anna was up a level.

Her first port of call was Hamburg, Germany, where she boarded a ship to America. The Hamburg State Archives provided digital documentation of Anna’s departure. The facts were pitiful: “Anna Dudas, age about 15, born about 1890. Single female. Hungarian. Household members: 1”.

Alone? She made that journey alone?

Perhaps not – in the list of names in second class, there was another girl her age from the same village. I saw them huddling together, during that freezing winter trip across the Atlantic, trying to avoid the stench and harassment. It was early February 1905.

They sailed via Dover and Boulogne-sur-Mer to New York aboard the SS Pennsylvania, one of the largest vessels of its kind. In addition to freight, there were 60 passengers in first class, 180 in second and 2,200 in third. The voyage took two weeks, without much fresh water, no heating, maybe one change of clothes, and only buckets for toilets. Upon arrival on 17 February 1905, Anna and her friend stated different onward destinations. Both these farmgirls were made of sturdy stuff.





1905. Ellis Island Immigration Department


Between 1900 and 1910, some 13 million immigrants passed through Ellis Island, near the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor. They are recorded on documents with one hand-scribbled line per human life, and dozens of lives to a page.

Did you have a “calling or occupation”? Could you read, write and speak English? What was your nationality and race? There were always dozens of different languages on board.

“In possession of $50 and, if less, how much?” Most said they had exactly that. No one said more.

Had you been in prison, an almshouse or an insane asylum? Were you an anarchist or a polygamist? Were you crippled or deformed, or unhealthy in body or mind? Everyone was absolutely fine, to a tee. Doctors checked later anyway.

Just because a ship landed on Monday, it didn’t mean you could leave on that Monday. Detention could take a while. On a separate Record of Detained Aliens, all appeared to be children and teens. Under the heading of “Disposition” were comments like “to friend, to relation, to sibling”. Many were disposed in the direction of illegible addresses.

Anna was going to a “friend”, Anna Pitko, 539 East 118th Street, New York City.

The record of “two breakfasts, two lunches, two suppers” may explain why $16 was declared, crossed out, and $10 written instead. Maybe you arrived with $16, got detained, got fed, and then got billed and had to pay before you saw a gangplank.

The final crucial column held the sacred initials of an official finally releasing Anna into her new life, at 16.35 – conveniently, just before nightfall. Welcome to New York City, and good luck.

Here is where I lost Anna’s trail for a few years. Then she turned up in the 1910 census, as Mrs Eugene Kardos, in the Bronx. By then they had had their first child Bela, who would be redubbed Albert – later to be my funny, winking, sweet Uncle Albert. So, how did Eugene get there? There was more digging to do.





1910 census. Eugene and Anna in the Bronx


The 1910 United States census tells us that Eugene and Anna Kardos were living in the Bronx and had been married three years. He was twenty-six, she was twenty-one and Bela was two. “Color: White. Naturalization Status: Alien.” They and all their parents were Hungarian (nationality), Magyar (race). It said their native tongue was English, which was definitely not true. I took that as an innocent error.

Based purely on the other names on this page, it appeared they were in a predominantly Russian Jewish neighbourhood, with an Italian and an Irish family as exceptions.

His occupation was bartender in a saloon. He had no days out of work. A favourite family photo, one of the few, shows the corner bar with his name above the door. To the side was written George’s Café, and there was an ad for Jacob’s Knickerbocker Beer. Quite a few relatives, family legend and guesswork (unsubstantiated) say Eugene’s dad helped him set up this business with an older partner, George.

In the photo, we believed it was big George with the white hair, the portly stance, and a cigar in hand – in a gesture that said he usually had a cigar in hand. Gran cooked in the café. She was known as someone who was phenomenally strong, phenomenally busy, and almost always cooking.

If the tiny girl in the picture was not a grandchild of George’s, then she’s likely to be Bertha, Eugene and Anna’s second born. She died before turning three after falling from a high window. None of them ever got over that. Dad always panicked if anyone wandered near an open window.

Did they live in the apartment above the bar? Maybe that was George and co. Somehow, I believe so. George was senior and more responsible, whereas Eugene was a young and lucky investor with a hard-working wife – so said legend and guesswork.

At any rate, the business would fail by 1920 when Prohibition made the sale of alcohol illegal. By then they’d have three sons: Albert, Eddie and our future dad, Alex.

Were there no records of Eugene’s arrival in New York because he had sneaked in? This was said about my other granddad, Joseph the Latvian. There wasn’t a scrap of documentation on his arrival, or before. He was a cook in the Russian navy and then on a Russian merchant ship, and got to New York that way. Allegedly, he got off ship and never got back on. He cooked in the US military reserves all his life. But that mystery must wait.

By the way, Latvian Joseph married German Elizabeth, whose lineage was no mystery. She came from a long line of sensible German farmers who, unlike the Hungarian side, had few secrets, intrigues or melodrama. However, a few generations back, a Gibbon did marry a Stork, which is an interesting DNA conundrum.

Here, Eugene’s trail stopped cold, blocked by my ignorance of his native tongue and his now anglicised name. I was raised in New Jersey and didn’t speak Hungarian. What was the Hungarian version of Eugene?

An internet search of the phrase “Find my Hungarian family” sent me to an informed, active, helpful bunch of people called “The Hungarian Exchange – Genealogy” (every ethnic and national group imaginable has an equivalent). They were speedy, too. It seemed like only minutes and I was a more informed person. In Hungarian, Eugene’s closest version is spelled Jeno (YAY-noo, approximately). I found no Jenos over a ten-year span, but there was one Yeno, all of whose data fitted.

If he’d arrived and said “YAY-noo”, they’d have filed him under Y. So, as I was looking under J, at first I couldn’t find him. But despite a handwritten J that looked like Y, this looked like him here, on the ship’s manifest of the SS Pannonia, which sailed from Fiume (formerly Italy, then Croatia) in 1906:

Kardos, Jeno. 22 years old, single, male, Hungarian Magyar. Occupation – merchant. Can read and write. Never been here before, had the required minimum $50 and not a penny more. He was staying with Rudolf Kohn, 208 East 95th Street. He was neither pauper, madman, anarchist nor polygamist. He was healthy in mind and body. 5 foot 5, light skin, dark hair, blue eyes. No other marks of identification. Born in Budapest.

That fitted Granddad, but I didn’t know who Rudolf Kohn was.

His ship was not the massive monstrosity on which Anna arrived, carrying a few thousand people. The SS Pannonia – built in Glasgow, of course – carried 80 first-class and 800 third-class passengers.

We’ll probably never work out how he and Anna met, and I can’t yet find a marriage certificate – which is a noticeable absence. However, this part of the Bronx was brimming over with Hungarians, so it’s likely they met in this neighbourhood. Although they moved house a lot, they never went far from this area.

Then came the big hook. Jeno/Eugene was not an only child, as he’d first seemed. He was, in fact, the youngest of seven. The full line-up, starting with the oldest, was Roza, Lujza, Berta, Frida, Markus, Rudolf and Jeno – four girls and three boys. I must say, I was stunned. I told the cousins. They were stunned too.

And, what a coincidence that one of them was Rudolf.





CHAPTER II New York, 1920s–1950s



The people on these genealogy sites knew the ropes, had the connections, and were quick. They came up with a stack of documents, not from church or civil records, but Jewish records. Every name was followed by “Izr” or “J”, the standardised mark indicating they were Jewish. There was no denying it now. Here was where our Rubik’s Cube started to come together. Rubik was Hungarian, by the way.

Best of all was seeing the details of the name-change document. This gang used to be named Kohn, but in 1888 they changed it to Kardos. That stunned me too. I was used to the surname Kardos, which meant swordsman – an appealing image of strength and skill. But a stack of birth, marriage and other documents all confirmed this. It all fitted. If the Kohns didn’t want to look Jewish, they rebranded themselves as Kardos, a popular Magyar name, a Hungarian Smith. If you wanted to hide in a crowd, this was a conveniently big crowd.

More than a few people have asked, in effect: What was Eugene’s problem, once he moved to New York? Loads of Jewish people went to the USA and wept for joy on arrival because here they could be Jewish probably without the threat of pogroms. People might snub them or even hate them, but most likely no one would murder them. In New York, you could be Jewish – if you wanted to.

Eugene didn’t want to.

His wife Anna – devoted mother, hard-worker and great cook – also appears to have been a strict, controlling, extremist, fear-inducing Catholic who pounded into her kids either loyalty or terror or both. Those who remembered her all described her as scary. Her church tormented and fried you for eternity unless you submitted to its uniquely sadistic version of divine love. Please let’s be clear: this is not representative of everyone in that religion. The question is: how did Catholic Anna marry Jewish Eugene in the first place?

I’d love to know how they met, and also how they first discussed the issue of religion. We know he never converted, never went to church or temple or anything of the kind. He was a secular man. Allegedly, their agreement was that Anna could raise their kids in her faith, but Eugene did not have to join. In exchange, she kept his secret. This was according to my parents. It didn’t stay secret. Secrets want out, same as daisies push through concrete. Truth wants sunlight, and will seek it non-stop – as I do.

Now, about Uncle Rudy – I feel I can call him Rudy, although he was born Rudolf and his Hungarian name was Rezso (REH-zhoo, sort of). When Eugene arrived in the USA in 1906, his entry form said he was staying with a Rudolf Kohn – aka Rudy Kardos, his brother – who had sailed over a few months before. Rudy didn’t stay in New York long. He returned to Budapest and married Aranka (I love that name) Hollander in 1912, the same year his father and grandfather died. A year like that needs a wedding.

Rudy stayed in Budapest for good, as far as I knew. He was listed as branch manager of a bank when he married that year. That wedding and that job sounded like he intended to stay. So he went from American Rudolf back to Hungarian Rezso. Maybe it was worth an experiment, but I suspect it’s unusual. I heard no tales of people who went back. If they emigrated and failed, then they stayed failed and disappeared. There was something unusual about his story, which I hoped would surface later.

The fact that Rudy used the old family name Kohn and not Kardos was an appealing gesture. He was a loose end I wanted to follow up. Plus, there were five other siblings and countless other kin back in Budapest to wonder about, now that I’d learned of their existence. Meanwhile, back to our story in the Bronx. Facts were accruing, and truths were emerging.





1920s. New York


Eugene and Anna had a new life in the Bronx running a bar together, but this chapter came to an unexpected and abrupt end. In 1920, they encountered Prohibition: that bizarre experiment, the American teetotal “Eighteenth Amendment” that was approved early in 1919, giving the nation one year to brace itself. The USA went dry one year later, 17 January 1920. No alcohol was to be sold anywhere, officially. Although “speakeasies” and all sorts of underground networks sprang up, Eugene and George sold the bar and Eugene bought a garage. The Assignment of Mortgage was listed in the New York Tribune on 15 January, just two days earlier. He seems to have thought ahead, or perhaps he was guided by Big Capable George, his business partner with the cigar.

In the 1920 census, Eugene and Anna were thirty-five and thirty, and the boys were eleven, eight and five. They were still in the Bronx but had moved from Adams Street near East 183rd to an apartment on 1941 Southern Boulevard. They may have launched the Kardos Garage, but unfortunately that didn’t last long either. It wasn’t clear why it did not work out. Perhaps the 1929 Crash and Great Depression affected them. How many people kept their cars then? Memories of that era terrified Dad for the rest of his life. He had a fear of spending money – even when he had some.

These census forms had some strange secret codes. One heading was Class. Eugene and the boys had a pale x suggesting it was not applicable. Anna had a large capital N in that space. What could they have meant? They were in City Ward AD 6, Block C, House number 750, Dwelling 67, Family 175. The place was not owned but rented, at $80 a month. They had a radio. It was confirmed again that Eugene and Anna could read and write, and that Eugene could also speak English, but their native tongue was Hungarian.

In a late-1925 census, Eugene and Anna were forty-one and thirty-five respectively. Albert was seventeen, Eddie thirteen and Alex was eleven. The formal group photo, a family favourite, was probably taken around that time. Young Alex, seated, looks about ten, and already very authoritative – even though his feet didn’t touch the ground yet. This was a hint of the dad to come.

On the 1925 census form, it said Eugene and Anna were born in Hungary, but the boys were all born in the United States and were automatically citizens. Their parents became naturalised citizens in 1914. Those awful boat journeys that first delivered them were now twenty-year-old memories.





1930 US census


This named Eugene’s occupation as Assistant Manager in the Insurance Industry. So, there were to be no more risks with running his own business. He was no longer a Proprietor, but a “Wage or Salary Worker”. This was the start of the longest steady job he ever had.

The boys were all still at home. Albert, twenty-two, was an office clerk at a rubber tyre factory; Eddie, eighteen, was a bookkeeper at an insurance company and Alex, sixteen, was still at school. Previously, Anna’s occupation was listed as Housekeeper. Now it was listed as None, possibly meaning she did more work than anyone.

As for Eugene, family rumour said he’d fallen into gambling again – his fondest weakness, and an eternal temptation. Anna put her foot down and told him to get regular safe work, so he went into insurance – another business based on the odds. He stayed there until retirement. The family remained in one place from then on, according to Dad. He used to sigh and say there were times before that when they moved house suddenly.

Photos of these years were damaged and sparse, but they suggested there were a few vacations in the countryside. Somebody had a farm – probably distant family, but no one knows who they were. Photos show Eugene’s citified sons looking amazed at bucolic surroundings, scared of dogs, fascinated by horse-drawn wagons, and generally keen to go barefoot. In one trip to a tobacco farm in Tennessee, Eugene was shown holding a hoe upside down. Allegedly he held his small finger aloft when drinking tea, in the bourgeois style. He was a city boy. Anna, by contrast, looked more at home in dirt or next to plants – an earthier sort altogether. Their photos were a funny combination of big, strapping farmgirl Anna next to Eugene, who was all of five foot five. The children’s story “The Country Mouse and The City Mouse” sums it up.

It’s hard to believe they had no idea what was brewing politically in Europe around this time in the early and mid-1930s. But then, some people in Europe didn’t know either – not yet. I think these American-born boys were revelling in unheard-of luxuries such as vacations and nice clothes, and they were sort of drunk on their own damned good luck. Did they fear it couldn’t last, or did they assume it would? Maybe they didn’t think that far ahead.





1940s. USA, Europe and the Second World War


Alex got married in 1942, the same year he was drafted. Eddie got married a few years before that and his first child was born in 1939. The oldest, Albert, married in 1933, and had a son and daughter. So, as the 1940s began, Eugene and Anna were fifty-five and fifty, home alone, and already grandparents.

During the Second World War, Alex went overseas for two years. Eddie had a heart condition and couldn’t go, but he served at home as an air-raid warden and auxiliary policeman. Albert’s work in the rubber tyre factory was a protected job during the war and so he didn’t go overseas either. There was a haunting photo of Alex as a boy of about seven, proudly playing soldier with a big lump of wood as his rifle. Even later, when he really was in the army, in both his basic and officer’s training, his photos in uniform seemed naïvely enthusiastic. He was nothing like that later.

Alex was awarded a medal for bravery, which was on his wall along with his diplomas and career honours, but he never spoke about it. It was too awful – that’s what his face said, as he shuddered and turned away, every time.

Back in 1914, at the start of the Great War, Granddad Eugene had to register for the US military, which was when he became a US citizen. That war forced him to declare his loyalties: Hungary was on the other side, and he had to choose. I didn’t know what sort of military service his siblings/enemies back in Hungary had to deal with, and I hoped to find out someday. Later in the 1940s, Eugene had to register for the Second World War as well, although he didn’t serve.





1950s. American Paranoid Patriots vs European Demonic Communists


After the war, all three brothers trooped into the American 1950s with families full of Baby Boomer kids, which includes the author of this story. The USA was in the grip of the “Second Red Scare”, McCarthyism, from around 1947 to 1956. Communism was considered a kind of Satanism, and hysteria was rampant. Accusations of treason could be made, without evidence, and careers and lives were ruined. Anyone connected to Eastern Europe could be blacklisted, interrogated for treason or jailed.

It’s beyond irony and tragedy that Hungarians suffering under Communism were accused by the USA of supporting it. You were vulnerable to persecution if you had relatives in Eastern Europe, if you or your parents were immigrants, and especially if you were Jewish. Everyone was afraid to be tarred with the same brush.

The three Kardos brothers were each receiving letters occasionally from distant cousins in Hungary, impoverished and begging for help. Those on the US side were afraid to even reply. None of those letters survived. I hated to think how the relatives ended up. Everyone was trapped. However, I had a feeling this would not be the saddest story I’d hear on this journey.

By contrast, two positive stories follow. The first is about bravery. The second is about hope and love.

Headquarters, United States Army Forces Western Pacific

Office of the Commanding General, APO 707

Citation to accompany General Orders No 144

26 August 1945

Citation For Bronze Star Medal

By direction of the President, under the provisions of Executive Order number 9419, 4 February 1944, a Bronze Star Medal is awarded to First Lieutenant ALEXANDER T KARDOS (015482236), Ordinance Department, United States Army. For heroic achievement in Leyte Gulf, near Leyte, Philippine Islands, on 12 November 1944, in connection with military operations against the enemy.

When an enemy aircraft, while making a bombing run on a merchant vessel, crashed into the ship’s bridge and burst into flame, scattering burning gasoline and bomb fragments over the deck, barrels of fuel and quantities of ammunition stored nearby exploded and began to burn furiously.

On deck a large number of men were trapped between the blazing fuel and a cloud of scalding steam escaping from shattered pipes, while in the forward hold a bomb had exploded, and other men lay wounded and dying.

First Lieutenant Kardos, a passenger, went without hesitation to the burning deck and at considerable risk to his own life, directed and assisted in the evacuation and treatment of casualties, working amid raging gasoline flames and amid explosions of ammunition within the ship’s magazines.

By his exemplary courage, initiative, and strenuous efforts in the face of grave danger, First Lieutenant Kardos performed an outstanding service during a period of extreme emergency.

His example gives the rest of us a criterion against which to measure our own achievements. His companions in the 168th owe him a debt of gratitude for his prompt recognition of danger and his subsequent action which undoubtedly saved others from death and injury.

Congratulations and best wishes.

Home address: Mrs Katherine J. Kardos (Wife). 9921 Corona Avenue, Corona, Queens, New York





The Fairy Tale of Rosie


Rosie was a legend. Her legend had a few versions. Here’s the version I got from my parents.

Rosie was from the old Hungarian neighbourhood in New York. She was a long-standing friend of the family, and especially good friends with Grandma Anna. Photos suggest Anna was older – a sort of mother figure to her, or at least a big sister and employer. Rosie worked as a cook and housekeeper for a lot of different families, doing odd jobs and domestic help.

She came from a farming area, where they grew flax, spun it into thread, and wove it into linen, on which they did rich, complexly textured embroidery in vivid colours. You could say they made textiles from seed to table. She made a gorgeous tablecloth sumptuously embroidered with deep purple and evergreen floral designs, and Anna’s swirling name in the middle. It later lived in my mother’s room, draped on an armchair, facing her. The detail is amazing – and it’s also amazing how the colours have held.

Rosie’s story was that when she was young, back in Hungary, she had a serious suitor who wanted to marry her. Both their families were against it: she was working class but he was middle class. She was sent to the New World, to forget him. She went, but never forgot. She wrote, sent money and parcels, and planned how they would reunite. Everyone thought she was crazy.

When “The War” came along, they lost touch. He couldn’t be found, but surfaced later, having survived, but he was not as solvent as before. Again, she sent parcels and money, but didn’t often hear back. Cousins said she was always collecting clothes and asking for donations to send, which everyone thought was naïve or pathetic.

Legend further contends that this saga was repeated over the two World Wars. In that version, they were separated right before the First World War when they were very young. They almost had it organised for him to come to New York, but then the Second World War broke out. In any case, the New York gang remembered lots of stuff being sent over to him, over many years, with little confirmation he actually received anything. This continued until the early 1950s.

Then suddenly, to everyone’s shock, the man in question arrived in New York. They were both well into middle-age by then, but soon they were married. By all accounts, they lived long enough to enjoy a good life together as a perfectly happy older couple.

My mother spoke many times of Rosie over the years, of how she was a symbol of someone who never gave up hope, and proved everyone wrong in the end. All the way along, everyone believed he didn’t care, but she knew he did. What a way to be proved right!

That is the legend of Rosie, however far from the facts it may have wandered.





CHAPTER III Budapest, 1850 Onwards



Eugene’s mother Sarolta (SHA-rol-ta) had seven children, whom we’ve met, and of whom he was the youngest. Sarolta herself was the oldest of seven siblings. In age order, Sarolta’s siblings were: Armin, Miksa (MEEK-sha), Luiza Elisabeth, Jonas, Eduard (or Ede) and Fani. The seven of them spanned seventeen years, while her own seven kids spanned fourteen years. This was not unusual back then.

On Granddad Eugene’s US papers, his parents’ names were anglicised into Sara and Leopold, but in Hungary, they were always Sarolta and Lipot (LEE-pot). When Sarolta Spitzer (SHPIT-zer) married Lipot Kohn (not yet renamed Kardos) in 1869, she was eighteen, and her youngest sister Fani would have been only two years old. Toddler Fani may have been a playmate of Sarolta’s first child Roza – technically her niece – born just a year later. Grown-up Roza would marry Arnold Stark, a stockbroker and later a First World War veteran. Their children would have known her baby brother Jeno as a very young uncle, or maybe a big brother. Their eldest Margit was about seven years younger than Jeno, and next came Karoly (KAH-roy), eight years younger.

There were more cousins closer to Jeno’s age on his mother’s side, the Spitzers. His Uncle Miksa and Aunt Szidonia (another wonderful name) had two girls. Cousin Margit was six years younger, born in 1890. Cousin Klara was born in 1888, which was the same year four-year-old Jeno was told his surname was not Kohn but Kardos.

How did Lipot and Sarolta explain that to their kids? How do you line up all your seven children and tell them that now they have a new surname? How do you add, “And by the way, kids, we are no longer Jewish either now, OK?”

How does anyone do that? Out of fear, I guess. Pure fear.

All these cousins must have known one another, probably very well. This little gang of his contemporaries – Margit and Karoly Stark, plus Klara and Margit Spitzer – may have waved Jeno farewell. He must have taken the train to the ship to leave for his new life. Since he was in his early twenties, and they were kids and teens, were they there as admiring fans? In their shoes, I would not have missed his departure for anything. I’d be tormented by the sweet pain of hero worship, accentuated by the December cold, and I’d be secretly dreaming my own teenage escape fantasies on trains and ships.

I’ll bet there were more cousins. And I’ll bet some of them produced second and third cousins. That’s a tantalising and frustrating idea. If any of them wrote letters to Eugene, they’re all gone now. Them and all their letters too.

Since Sarolta had six siblings, I was assuming Lipot had a few of his own. They were hiding – if they existed at all. To find them, I needed Lipot’s parents’ names, and they were hiding too. There wasn’t anything about his parents on his marriage certificate. I’d found no birth record.

But surely, his parents’ names had to be on his death certificate? That was the thing to find. However, there was a snag: the maze that is Hungarian record-keeping meant that a straightforward death certificate can be deathly difficult to find. Public records are extremely localised in Hungary, and so such a document’s location would depend on where he died – fairly precisely.

If he died at home, the record would be in his neighbourhood’s archive. But if he went to a hospital in another district – and there are over twenty small districts in Budapest – then the record would be in that neighbourhood’s archive. If he had a heart attack across town and died on that street, then that street’s neighbourhood might be holding the records. I needed to know not only the exact date but also which little neighbourhood he died in to find where the document was housed.

I could try his last listed address, or the address of his widow, a bit later. In these cases, you had to go through the records chronologically and painstakingly. At this rate, I could learn the Hungarian language from scratch – or rather, I could with another lifetime. Or, if I hired someone, over there. Or, if I went over there myself – what a far-fetched, kooky idea. Great-Granddad Lipot’s death certificate had to wait.



Meanwhile, back in 1906, Rudy had already sailed to New York that summer and Eugene followed in winter. Eugene stayed; Rudy went back. The vast majority of this clan were born, lived, stayed and died in Budapest, and possibly never left the city limits. Most of them were buried in the city, many in the same cemetery. Eugene was the only one who sailed away for good.

So, as any average genealogy enthusiast can tell you, you start by talking to everyone still alive, gathering everything you can, while you can. Dad died in 1984, and even back then he wasn’t going to say a word. However, Mom was still around in 2016 when I started this journey, then in her nineties. I was due to see her anyway. Her memory was thin and inconsistent, but there were always rare moments when she was clear-headed and happy to talk. It was time for some dialogue, and maybe a few home truths.





CHAPTER IV New Jersey, USA, 2016



Autumn was always Mom’s favourite season. Her memory had been failing for years, more every year. She was ninety-five, and it felt like the last year of her having any true moments of alertness. On this visit to the nursing home in which she’d lived for many years, I was able to see her every day over two months. Ironically, the best visits we’ve ever had were when she had no idea who I was. She was always fantastically polite to strangers.

I did the things I usually did – tidied the place, talked to her no matter who she thought I was, read to her, and just hung out with her. Also, I kept her company at meals, which guaranteed she ate properly and cleaned her plate, and that always got a thumbs up from the staff. I bought her new clothes, snipped out the size 16 labels and assured her that she was still a 10.

Most of all, we embarked on a fine project to tackle a mountain of family photographs. There was a stack of chaotic albums, a stack of chaotic boxes, and a stack of general photographic chaos. Every day I sifted through photos, asked her who was who, and scribbled down what she remembered. It was now or never, so far as information was concerned. She loved every minute, but the next day she had forgotten, which meant she enjoyed these things on a daily basis.

Her favourites were scrapbooks with cards, messages and old-style stationery, one each from her seventieth, eightieth and ninetieth birthday parties. In her world, women wrote Little Notes to each other on nice stationery. She could listen to those read out loud over and over. Her favourite picture album was about her and her two sisters, with whom she stayed close all her life. Her husband’s side of the family, the three brothers, was never first choice. She was respectful but cooler to His Side. Those three Kardos boys only stayed sketchily in touch with each other – when their wives organised it. The Jewish branch (Albert and co) was seldom contacted by our branch, which as a child I never understood, because I loved those cousins. But Kay and her sisters saw each other on all major holidays, like clockwork.

She was the youngest of three sisters, Dad was the youngest of three brothers, and there were lots of symmetrical photos. Three of these, three of those, very tidy. As time passed, with this daily activity, we turned fifteen dishevelled boxes into fifteen labelled albums. Then we read them, day after day. She was repeatedly amazed anew that the slim, alluring cutie in the swimsuit was her when she was about eighteen. She squawked, laughing, “That’s me? Well, I’m not like that anymore!”

Photographic milestones: Eugene must have taken this picture of Anna and youngest son Alex at the grave of baby Bertha, who was almost three years old when she fell from a high window. Dad/Alex looked about five. He would not have remembered Bertha, but he’d have absorbed the imprint of Anna’s heavy grief. In this scene, he wore a dark sailor suit, and a dark look that was half comprehending, half blank. He was hugging the gravestone, holding tight to one side, while Anna leaned heavily on the other. Many years later, she would be buried there too, with Bertha. I suspect she decided this immediately after Bertha’s funeral. She’d join her baby girl. It was just the two of them, no Eugene.

Most surprising recurring theme: there were no more than a dozen photos of Eugene, but in most of them he has fiercely clenched fists. All who saw this agreed it was a strange stance and very tense. He was holding tightly to some secrets, perhaps.

Biggest mystery photo: a wedding where Eugene and Anna are standing in as surrogate parents. It’s formally posed, about a dozen in the party. I tried to believe the groom looked like Eugene, but not really. I showed it around, but no one knew. I secretly wanted the lady in a dark dress behind Anna to be her twin sister, Julie. That was purely wishful thinking. I suspected Julie never left the farm.



That autumn, I kept filling Mom’s bird-feeders, and the leaves turned gold and orange. While she was distracted or sleeping, I tidied. One day I started with the dresser drawers. It was a classic clearance in that everything had meaning, or irony, or comedy, or weirdness, or something noteworthy and universal.

I replaced the fallen baubles from the table-top Christmas tree, which was now a permanent fixture all year round. I’ve no idea whether she liked it or even noticed it, but no one dared touch or move it.

When putting like-with-like, categories were: socks, obsolete lingerie, too many purses and gloves and hankies, trinket jewellery, greeting cards and memorabilia, and mysterious plastic medical contraptions not understood or apparently needed. I think they supported various limbs in the past.

Into the trash went: cheap plastic razors, leaking batteries, wax-type earplugs coated with hair and grit, unexplained plastic bags, plastic minutiae, and used envelopes with nothing in them and no return address on them.

I unearthed ancient greeting cards, the kind teachers help kids write. This may be my first written story. It was an early primary school doily valentine, with the assigned title “The Story of Valentine’s Day”.

A long time ago People loved a god to protect them from wolfs. So they made a day to go around giving gifts and cards to their sweethearts. Because the birds did it too. And that’s why I love you. From Eileen.

What could my poor mother have said? What were “wolfs” and birds to do with anything? Oh poor mothers, when they realise their tiny kid is already a weirdo.

Then she’d wake up, and it would be time for pictures again.



Best close-up: that beauty was Julia. Mom’s dad, Joseph the Latvian navy cook, had a sister named Julia who also emigrated to New York. Mom’s middle name was Julia, and there was a small card with a pin and the message that this was a gift to her from Aunt Julia. This headshot of Julia was indeed extraordinarily beautiful. Mom stroked it, admiringly.

“Aunt Julia. So pretty.” There was some writing on the back, in what I guess was Latvian, using a Cyrillic alphabet. It looked like “Riga. 19 April 1907”. Maybe.

“Was she close to your dad?”

“No.” Mom drifted. “They were… distant. She was nice. But him – always so angry. Over nothing. He was just – angry.” Mom shook her head. “We tried everything. Nothing worked. It’s just how he was. You know?”

“Yes,” I sighed. “I know.”

She drifted into her own thoughts; she didn’t see me, but looked content. Then suddenly, she seemed to spot someone in a photo and greeted him out loud. “Hello.”

“Who’s that?” I asked.

“Dad.”

“My dad?”

“No,” she said. “My dad.” Aha. Latvian Joseph, the angry one, the Stalin fan, the harsh iron-fisted taskmaster, the feared dictator, the heavy drinker and tantrum-thrower, the guy with the lunch wagon in Corona, Queens, where he slaved over a hot grill all day and could crack four eggs at one time.

“What’s he doing?”

“Not much. I’m just watching him.”

“Say, was his English accented? Did he sound Russian?”

“No. He sounded fine.”

“How about Dad’s parents?”

“Who?”

“Dad’s people. Eugene and Anna. Did either of them speak with an accent?”

“Hmm.” She drifted again.

“I thought maybe Eugene lost his accent at work, but Anna kept hers. Do you remember?”

She squirmed, not wanting to answer. I had to repeat it to gently draw her out.

“Well,” she reluctantly scowled, wrinkling her nose. “They were… European.”

To me, that was good, cool, stylish, older and wiser. To her, obviously not.

“They were European?” I coaxed. “And…?”

And then came one of her rare miniature word-floods.

“It was embarrassing. They were – from the Old Country. We were American. His accent wasn’t so bad. Hers, maybe a little. They dressed, they acted – different. Back then, you couldn’t be different. You were in or you were out. Everybody’s parents were Old World, but we were American. Nobody acted like their parents.”

Nobody acted like their parents? She certainly changed her tune and her demands when her own kids were teens. She continued, “Anyway, we moved to the suburbs, got out of New York. Then we didn’t see them so much.”

That’s how I remember it too. While Mom saw her sisters several times a year, Dad and his brothers saw each other much less often. Men of that generation didn’t talk, although their wives would have. Uncle Eddie and crew were in New Jersey too, and we met a few times, although not nearly enough. Uncle Albert and crew were further away in New York. We almost never saw them. In that case, it was not just the geography.

Back when Albert was dreaming of his future family, it may not have been smooth sailing. Anna, the super-strict Catholic who raised them all Catholic with a vengeance, may not have immediately embraced the prospect of her son Albert marrying Jewish Fran Levine. I can only assume it was the case, at least at first, that Albert was afraid to approach his mom, Scary Anna. He went to his dad.

Family legend said Eugene’s response was he knew a great couple when he saw one, and if Albert didn’t propose marriage to Fran, Eugene would do it for him. So, Eugene gave his blessing, Albert and Fran married and had a long, happy life, despite inauspicious beginnings. Somehow or other, Anna must have come around, certainly when she was so well served by them during her widowed old age.

In her older years, she only occasionally saw her two younger sons, yet the Jewish faction never failed her. Albert and Fran saw Eugene and Anna every single Sunday until Eugene died in 1948, and then until Anna died in 1956. That’s far beyond ironic.

Because of his marriage to Fran, Albert was excommunicated from the Catholic Church, which for him was a painful rejection. I respected that pain, but later I thought: lucky him – I wish they’d excommunicated me. I wish I’d fought my way out sooner.

In their case, Albert and Fran respected all religions practised kindly. Nonetheless, they could never agree on which religion to practise with their children. So, they followed neither, which meant their kids sometimes felt doubly left out, not versed in the songs or traditions of either side. It was awkward.

It was only much later in life I learned Dad and Mom were the only ones to reject and deny Eugene’s Jewish blood. Everyone else was more accepting, but I didn’t learn that until my mother’s memorial service. Only she and Dad wanted this kept secret.

Enough enigma, rejection and irony. I was due for a field trip. It was a good one. In fact, it was a whopper.





CHAPTER V Ellis Island Museum, 2016



I joined a childhood pal to visit the Ellis Island Museum of Immigration. We seemed to be the last people on earth to do so. As a child, I was dragged up the Statue of Liberty, but the Ellis Island Museum did not exist then. I was looking forward to this.

The Ellis Island ferry Miss Freedom docked, and we waited to go down the gangplank. The waves smacked the boat, and unexpectedly, huge emotions welled up. My grandparents each had a once-in-a-lifetime moment waiting to go down their gangplank, to a whole new life here in New York City, over a hundred years ago. They were crossing over to a new identity. I was just crossing over to have a nice day out with my friend. I knew it would be an interesting and meaningful trip, but I didn’t expect to feel my grandparents’ memories so closely. Tears came, and I was shaking, head to toe, every bone and every molecule. This amazed me. I did not see that coming.

Great-grandparents Lipot and Sarolta (dubbed Leopold and Sara on US records) never came over. They sent son Eugene to New York, allegedly with money to help set him up in business. They all must have known they’d never see each other again. The idea was, presumably, that all their descendants would be better off in the New World, and this was worth that sacrifice. When parents agree to never see their kids again, for the betterment of all future descendants, this is the ultimate sacrifice – other than dying for them.

My version of emigration was neither dramatic nor dangerous. I thought what I had was the travel gene, but no, it was more like an emigration gene. I didn’t want to visit places and return home. I wanted to move abroad. This was not a popular attitude, so I learned to keep it quiet. As a pre-schooler I’d been constantly staring at a plastic globe of the world, wanting to see all those places. The clincher came in kindergarten.

The new girl, Rosa, was from Puerto Rico, spoke no English, and was the only brown kid in a group of whites. She was shy, sweet, and overwhelmed. It’s sad to say, most kids avoided her, but a few of us befriended her. Some said she dressed funny and smelled funny, but we saw sweetness. She lived not far from me and we were after-school playmates until, unfortunately, this was stopped because “she was not our sort”.

I was so impressed by her situation, how brave and cool it seemed. I may not have grasped it was not exactly her choice. She moved away only a few months after joining us. By then, thanks to her example, I was decided. I would be adventurous like her. I’d move to some foreign place, somehow, someday, and what an adventure that would be! Maybe then I’d be that person of the wrong colour, wrong style or wrong smell, but I’d be the best neighbour possible. I’d build local bridges, kitchen by kitchen, garden by garden. That was the dream scenario.

When I was in my early twenties, with a degree, work experience and savings, I found the ideal postgraduate programme and sponsoring professor – in Japan. I told my parents it would be less than a year, but deep down I knew I’d never come back. Once I left, I left. I have lived abroad ever since, and it has been nothing but enriching and wonderful, if challenging. How lucky I was, to be able to make that choice. When you know who you are meant to be, and what you are meant to do, it is inner peace itself.

Of course, I said nothing of this to Mom and Dad, or anyone who might tell them, but only “See you next year”. When my toe hit the carpet of the gateway to the plane, it was settled. “This is it,” I thought, “your own life starts now. You are not going back: you are going nowhere but forward. So get brave, get moving, and keep moving.”

Although I didn’t go through a fraction of what my grandparents went through, I did have that moment on a gangplank. It all starts now – one of life’s big turning points, where there is no turning back. So, I arrived at Ellis Island staggering over a swaying gangplank, half-blinded by weepy eyes, but somehow got onto dry land.

In miscellaneous format, what follows are my favourite random notes from Ellis Island.

About half of the current population of the USA (over 150 million) were thought to have descended from the 12–13 million who passed through here. The biggest influx was when seven or eight huge ships arrived at one time, carrying about 12,000 people in total. The Immigration Station hit their record that time when they processed about 5,000 people in one day.

As people came up the stairs to the Registration room, doctors did a “six-second check”. They tried to find people too weak to climb the stairs, or who seemed ill or insane. These people were marked on the back with a large chalk X and sent to the medical area straight away. Everyone went through there, eventually. The fat crochet hook they used to lift eyelids and inspect for contagious eye problems was large and very disturbing.

About 20 per cent were detained, for medical or legal reasons. About 2 per cent, or roughly 250,000, had to go back. They routinely detained unaccompanied women and children. In order to be released, they needed a letter from a sponsor or a family member, and/or a pre-paid train ticket to their destination.

A woman was not allowed to leave with a man who was not either a husband or a family member. There were lots of marriages performed on board the ship. There were also special boarding houses that accommodated single females temporarily, if they had no other options and were entitled to be admitted – and if their ship had sailed back. Also, I imagine a healthy number of helpful male “cousins” appeared.

Cousins. We all need cousins.

Those who had family to meet them, once they passed all hurdles, could proceed to an area called the Kissing Area where families were reunited. There were some cultural style differences, of course. It was noted that Italian men kissed their children like mad, but were only physical with their wives later, in private. Hungarians and Slovaks threw their arms around each other and wept. Jewish people tended to hug and envelop their entire families at once, kissing them endlessly.

One man met his wife and children, saying, “You are in America now. You are safe.” Sad to say, I am not sure there is any such place, anywhere, anymore. But it’s all relative, of course.

Here’s my favourite story, to end on a happy note. One ship carried 700 women, 230 of whom were “picture brides”. They had pledged to meet a prospective husband, based on having exchanged photos and not much else. The women had the option to say no once they met the guy. Some of them had already made other arrangements, during the voyage, with someone they met on the ship. Well, a bird in the hand is worth more than a stranger and his photo, I guess.

Reportedly, many of these 230 men got into small boats, surrounded the huge ship and hurled bouquets of flowers and boxes of candy onto the decks. There was, of course, total mayhem when all these men and women tried to locate each other, holding their precious photos up to each other.

That must have been quite a scene on the quayside.





CHAPTER VI Goodbyes, New Jersey, 2016–2018



As she reminisced her way through photo albums, day after day, Mom touched all images of babies, whoever they were. She stroked every one, saying “Cute!” to each in turn, “Cute, cute, so cute!” Every so often she looked up at me to beam, “This is great. This is just great.”

Our project was a success.

Part of my looking through her documents was to confirm that she lost two daughters, and possibly miscarried a third child, before the arrival of the three of us who survived to adulthood. I checked the documents but said nothing to her. It was never something she cared to discuss, unless pressed. One day as we watched TV, and she stroked more baby faces, suddenly she spoke.

“Do you have children? I had six.”

“Six! Wow, really?”

“Yes.”

I was taken aback. Six pregnancies is what she must have meant. I was shocked she said it like that since she spoke of this so seldom, always minimally, distant and sadly numb.

Here, now, suddenly, at ninety-five, she was remembering something vividly. “There was one…” she said, holding the imaginary infant in her arms, showing me, rocking it. “There was one, but it was taken away…” and her arms showed that too. She reached out, confused and distressed, while the babe was removed from view. This must have been her second born, Karen, the one born so malformed they thought it best Mom did not see. The poor child soon died. Mom’s arms were still searching the air for where she went.

By way of distraction, I passed her the nearest photo, one of Dad – her husband Alex – as a boy with his mother. Mom then said what many have said about Anna, Scary Gran, her mother-in-law.

“Did that woman ever smile?”

All current evidence says no. Dad was much the same. Mom was always much more of a smiler than he was. She now looked over his sterner images and frowned a bit.

“Dad didn’t smile much either, did he?” she said.

“No, serious guy.”

“Very serious. He didn’t approve of anything. Or anyone. Or me.” She paused for thought, then her brows knit up unpleasantly. “Do people approve of me?”

“Sure they do. They like you. They love you.”

She smiled, glad this was settled. She stared at her tray. “Is that ice cream?”

“Yes. You OK with the spoon?”

“I’m fine.”

And everything was fine, as of that moment. It was settled.



It was time for another set of field trips. The first was to Dad’s cemetery on September 11.

I’ve made numerous trips to this cemetery, for long walks and pruning the irises. This time I didn’t misplace Dad. Let me explain. Once before, after a long gap, I found the cemetery so expanded and changed, I couldn’t find him. The nice guy in the office said it happens all the time. He looked him up and gave me a map. Today, however, I sniffed my way from memory.

In 1984, iris bulbs were planted around the headstone. Now, all that foliage was full and lush, surrounding the whole thing, looking great but totally covering his name, and no blooms. I did a quick weed. Now names could be seen. Another few deeper prunes, when the ground isn’t frozen, and they’ll flower again.

There were gently rolling hills, ancient trees and flowering shrubs. The hills were in the main, older section. The outlying, newer areas, for the newly deceased, were flatter suburban plains, with skinny fresh saplings that needed a few decades to become whatever they will become. Dad was in an area between the two, the end of the old section.

I couldn’t find the stone plaque the US government gives all its military veterans. He was a captain in the US army. Normally these sit at the foot of the plot, but it wasn’t there. A horrible fear gripped me. A phone call to the office cleared this up. The helpful lady explained that grass often grows over them, since they’re flat and level with the ground. She said she’d send the gardeners to do a trim, and so they did.

September 11 in the USA feels like a sort of second Veterans Day. I had a very long walk, a good cry and a good think – and felt tired but much better afterwards.

Things become precious. Those irises will be spectacular again. Fewer roots, less foliage, better blooms.



Tour number two was to the old homestead. This house, the trees and I would all turn exactly sixty years old the following spring. This was the house I was born in, almost literally. It was just barely built when Dad and Mom moved in, when it was the only house on the street. So, in the first days of both me and that home, Dad planted saplings all around the house. They were now enormous and magnificent. I walked under the trees, admired the old slate path and patio that Dad pieced together one long summer, and wondered if neighbours would soon report me. Before leaving, I tried the doorbell but no one answered. That’s when I noticed something new on the doorframe: a mezuzah, the traditional Jewish symbol of God’s protective eye over that household. I could not help but smile.



Back at Mom’s. She was tired and complaining how bossy Dad was, how bossy men are, how marriage is a drag. She peered at me. “You married?”

“No.”

“That’s too bad.”

“You just said it was a drag.”

“It is.”

“And men are too bossy?”

“They are. So bossy. So selfish, always wanting their way.”

“Exactly. I don’t like being bossed.”

“That’s too bad,” she said sympathetically.

“What?”

“Men are so bossy,” she frowned.

“True.”

“Are you married?”

“No.”

“That’s too bad.”

And so on. Maybe her auto-pilot sentences were occurring in random order. Or maybe some attitudes are just complicated. She drifted away. Godot was due any moment, so we waited.



It was time to say goodbye. Over the last months, I’d been many things to her: she often referred to me as daughter, but sometimes as niece, friend, pal, neighbour, good buddy, and “do you work here?” Tonight at dinner, she introduced me as her niece. The nurse pressed her for a name, but she couldn’t remember so the nurse tried to help with a hint.

“That’s your daughter.”

“No it isn’t.”

We waited. She squirmed.

“OK, like a daughter but not really.” I laughed, and she looked puzzled.

“You know what I mean,” she said, annoyed. “Officially, yes. But really, no.”

She had never been more honest with me in her life. The staff gave us some space, and soon Mom was on a rare talking roll.

“You have kids?”

“No.”

“That’s a shame. My middle daughter didn’t either.” Yet again, she was talking about me to me, not knowing she was speaking to the real me. “I guess she was a good student, but she was good for nothing else.”

“Good for nothing?”

“Never had kids.”

“I heard she was a teacher. That’s good, isn’t it?”

“I don’t know.” She sounded miffed, defensive.

“Kids need teachers, right?”

“I don’t know.” She was outright annoyed now.

“Was she at least a good person?”

“I don’t know! She never had kids. Good for nothing.”

It stung, but it was not the first time. She’d admitted it many times over the years, just never this strongly. Still, I’d rather know the facts, whether I like them or not. Here are some more facts. From pre-school days, I skipped all the readily available baby dolls on offer, and instead dressed up an old Barbie in a homemade Supergirl outfit with a cape. I flew her around the globe, rescuing people from earthquakes and floods. My dolls were brave heroes. I knew then I wanted to stay single, not have kids, travel the world, do a useful job like in education or health, and then after work, I’d write stories of these travels and adventures. This was the plan. It was the precise opposite of what Mom insisted was the only way. It’s why she had little to say to me for most of my adult life. I’d been derelict in my duty.

Dad was even clearer when I first admired all his diplomas and said I wanted just as many. He explained, “No. You can’t. Whatever a girl wants in life, her job is to give that up, and help a man get what he wants. She must stay home and serve. Anything else is a betrayal.” So I kept quiet about my dreams, gathered a nice stack of diplomas, and went to live on the other side of the planet where, with luck, I’d annoy no one. And that is where I have stayed.

On this trip, in terms of fact-finding and research, the most valuable thing I discovered was that very first piece of paper back in 1977 on which I jotted down notes when I was on the phone to Mom, asking her questions about Dad’s people. There wasn’t much. But, there was this:

“Eugene – brothers or sisters? One was an engineer. Someone had a daughter who wrote to Albert until the 1960s.” That comment was entirely cryptic. Who wrote to Albert? What cousin might that be?

There was also this: “Something upset him, age 17, changed religion. WW2, left religion.” This would haunt me. Something happened, and Eugene no longer wanted to be Jewish.

There were so many unanswered questions.

Mom died about a year later. I wrote the eulogy on behalf of everyone, which was warmly received.





Katherine “Kay” Kardos, 1921–2017


Mrs Katherine Julia Koteiwo Kardos passed away peacefully in her sleep, age ninety-six, December 8, 2017. She was a resident of New Jersey for over fifty years.

Although her final year involved discomfort and immobility, most of her elder years were spent contentedly, with a clear gratitude that she was seldom in pain or severe distress, as some are. She enjoyed her big picture window, watching nature in detail, loving the birds attracted to her bird-feeder, enjoying flowers, trees and weather display their daily changes.

Many of the staff greeted her with a cheerful “Kay-Kay!”, sweetly, hinting she was well-liked, easy-going, a smiler. She had a calm, peaceful way that was widely appreciated. Many tributes used the words: gracious, lovely, warm, smiling, beautiful.

Kay was the youngest of three girls, and married the youngest of three boys, which made for symmetrical photo albums. Her mother Elizabeth Koteiwo was the daughter of German immigrants with a farm in upstate New York, a place young Kay and her cousins adored, visiting their grandparents as a little gang each summer. That’s where she learned to swim, when they threw her in without warning, a Sink-Or-Swim challenge. She said it worked but was not fun. She arranged civilised, low-risk pool lessons for her own kids.

Kay’s dad, Joseph Koteiwo, was a Latvian immigrant and a former cook in the Russian merchant navy, who had his own “greasy spoon” lunch wagon. His claim to fame was routinely cracking four eggs onto the grill at one time, two in each hand.

Kay was born and raised in Corona, Queens, New York. She played the violin as a child, and graduated from Newtown High School. She laughed about being a casual student, learning typing and shorthand but hoping not to use them. She looked forward to marriage, children and grandchildren, getting out of the city and into a house in the suburbs. These wishes came true.

She married Alexander Thomas Kardos, 27 June 1942. They met at Camp Sagamore, upstate NY, a singles vacation spot. There, everybody had a nickname. Hers was Waif, and his was Criss-Cross, because she sometimes looked timid and lost, and he had a strange tennis backhand.

He was in his army uniform in their wedding photo, and immediately was sent overseas for two years during the Second World War. She worked in a defence plant, as her part in the war effort. When he returned, they lived near Washington DC and later in Connecticut, while building his career as a patent lawyer. Finally, they settled in Scotch Plains.

Ashbrook Drive was an empty field in 1957. The house was built from scratch. When the phone company was late in installing the line, Kay went to them, a tiny lady, hugely pregnant, saying in her typically polite way that she probably needed a phone. They installed the phone.

The many tiny tree saplings they planted then, and watered diligently, are about sixty years tall today, like us, her three offspring. She was a talented gardener of fruit and vegetables. Summer brought delicious produce to the table. She lovingly tended numerous flowering shrubs, a cherry tree, quince, purple irises and many flowers. The popular patio and screened-in porch (NJ mosquitoes be gone!) were surrounded with colourful blooms.

As for her culinary finesse, most say her skills as a baker were best in her plum and apricot cakes – her mother’s recipe. They barely cooled before vanishing.

She was active as a swimmer, a skier, and a golfer. Al was no skier, but she bravely drove the gang to New England countless times, on her own. There was a trip to a lake or the shore, every summer, no matter how the kids behaved in the back seat. She had patience.

Kay and Al lived two houses from Ashbrook Golf Course, where they were regulars. She charmingly smiled while admitting her golfing was social, to support her husband’s devotion. We think she preferred the garden. When he died in 1984, it’s possible her golf clubs collected dust, and she’d smile quietly about that too.

She had a cute, simple shrug when she simply accepted things. She had the gift of contentment.

Kay and Al were also keen dancers, experienced and graceful. After he passed away, she missed that.

As a young bride, she joined what became known as The Bridge Group, which started as bridge and ended up as close friends for over fifty years. I wish we all had that.

Kay was preceded in death by her two sisters, and her husband of forty-two years, Alexander T. Kardos. She is survived by her children and grandchildren, and a fond crowd of nieces and nephews and in-laws, plus all their combined many offspring and grandchildren. They all called her Aunt Kay or Grandma, and she was like a second mother or grandma to many.

Countless friends of all ages knew her as a great listener, an unassuming mentor, and a trustworthy confidante, whether over the phone or over the kitchen table. Over the years, on Sundays, she attended a variety of different Christian congregations, but later in life maybe was less concerned about which denomination, and more about good atmosphere, nice people, respect. It was probably in her helpful listener role, where you could say she was in her own special parish, in her favourite church of all.

“Lavender Miss Katherine” plants were given as keepsake gifts.





CHAPTER VII Somewhere in the State of New York



A photo that haunted me was of Anna and her first two boys: she is dressed head to toe in mourning black with a veil, since baby Bertha had just died. Toddler Eddie is held tightly, high on her hip, while Albert stood by her, looking confused, his hand limply on her lap, and her hand grabbing his shoulder. She looks so heavy she could crash to the floor. But she will not. She will hold up her boys. She is unbelievably strong, and courageously honest in how she looks straight into the camera and lets it see everything in her broken heart and body. It’s a painfully strong image.

Maybe Anna’s life would have been very different if she’d had another female in the house. Maybe baby Bertha was named after Eugene’s sister Berta, who died aged only twenty-three. I did not know what killed her at such a tender age. Maybe that was part of the reason Eugene and Anna anglicised their first child’s name, from Bela to Albert, so a bit of baby Bertha lived on in Albert too. That was an old Hungarian custom.

Anna’s loss is connected now with the image of my ageing mother – not exactly recalling but reliving the moment her dying baby was taken away, her confused arms circling around vaguely searching, and just not comprehending. Unlike Anna, she did not emanate strength but timidity. Mom’s first baby died after less than two years. Still in shock, she was encouraged by many (men) to get pregnant again as soon as possible, to forget and move on. But it was too soon, she said. She was not ready and she lost that baby too. Although strong in other ways, she did sometimes need a foggy amnesia as her best protector.

Grandma Anna and baby Bertha were buried together at St Raymond’s Catholic Cemetery in the Bronx. Eugene died five years before Anna, but was not buried with them. Perhaps his race went against him.

“Something upset him, age 17, changed religion. WW2, left religion.”

So, Granddad Eugene went missing for a while, or rather, his marker did. Some odd discrepancy was afoot. At one point, I had high hopes for one Eugene Kardos buried at Mount Carmel, Queens. That was nearby, and a Jewish cemetery. But no, it was someone else, with the same middle name but different dates.

The search was on. Every New York City record site I went to had nothing. They suggested I look outside of the city. Eugene was buried outside his beloved New York City? That couldn’t be right, could it? Yes it could – and it was.

He was listed in Westchester County, outside the famous five boroughs of NYC. Ferncliff Cemetery had his right full name, right birth date, right death date. It must be him, but this wanted a double-check.

There was another question. Eugene died on 25 January 1948, and there was a cremation the very next day. But cremation is forbidden in Judaism. What was Anna thinking, or wasn’t she thinking at all? Did he or didn’t he want that?

At any rate, cemetery records say the burial was later, 30 April. The cremation and ceremony were held right away, yet the burial took place three months later? Whatever the reason, his ashes were put to rest far from his adopted Bronx. I do not believe that’s what he would have wanted, but that’s speculation. It may have been cheaper. Anna had other, rather more controversial expenses, as we shall now see.

Anna seems to have had strong fears for Eugene’s future in the afterlife since he never converted to her religion. I found dusty old papers in dusty old files to do with his death, and I was surprised – not that he held his ground and would not join her faith, but that for his own eternal good, the day after he died, she enrolled him – at an unspecified cost – in a “Purgatorial Society” run by Franciscan monks in Manhattan. They’re still there, and boast quite an array of good deeds on their website. Nevertheless, I do not believe Granddad’s soul required their assistance, whatever fee was paid.

Apparently, the deal was they prayed for outsiders to be granted honorary status, to possibly qualify later for a “Get out of Purgatory” card with a strong enough prayer-count from insiders. Obviously I don’t know, and my polite email to the monks went unanswered.

Perhaps to Anna, Eugene was Jewish enough to be barred from her cemetery, but not so Jewish that he couldn’t be cremated. Was it money? After paying off the monks to cure the fatal affliction they invented, was there little left for his plot?

Speculation was not helping me be objective about Scary Gran. At this point, I imagined screwing up my courage – I am a coward with domineering types – and saying to her, “If you’re trying to hide him, Anna, forget it. I will find him. If I have to go to Budapest to get the truth, then that’s what I’ll do. You will not hide anything from me ever again.”

Eugene’s obituaries were placed in The Home News and Journal America, neither of which I could find. So instead, I’ll quote a letter from a cousin of mine who remembers him from her childhood and has a rather sweeter angle on things.

“As far as I recall (being told, not observing), Grandpa was Jewish. I was very young when he had his stroke. When we visited he usually played cards. Uncle Eddie made a special card rack so he only had to use one hand.

“Grandpa loved the horses. The story goes that Grandma took him downstairs one day and left him on a bench to enjoy the air. A bus went by going to one of the race tracks. When Grandma returned to bring him back upstairs, he was gone. He returned later. I don’t know if he won or not.

“I don’t remember how old I was when he died. I just remember I enjoyed his company. I can visualise him right now sitting at the bridge table playing cards.

“I was a preteen when Grandma passed. I remember seeing my father (Albert) crying at the funeral parlor. I had never seen him cry before. This was my first funeral. Back at our apartment everyone was enjoying themselves. I couldn’t understand why everyone was laughing. I was almost in tears when Uncle Eddie sat me down and explained that they were celebrating her life and good memories.”

So Anna wasn’t always scary, just most of the time. Allegedly.

Later, I contacted the cemetery. They confirmed it was really him; they did the cremation, but no plot was paid for, and the ashes were never claimed. The cemetery’s custom was to gather all such unclaimed ashes and inter them in a large communal plot, once or twice a year. That’s why Eugene has no marker; he never did.





Back in Budapest, and way back in time


The internet and history sent me a nice surprise: Eugene’s older sister Lujza had two children. What a delightful find! This was not just good for this story, it was good for my sentimental hope of someday finding living relatives. But, that unlikely event to one side, here were the new pieces to our puzzle.

Lujza had two kids, Karoly and Olga. Second oldest of the seven siblings, Lujza married a man named Jakab Neufeld. He seemed to disappear from all records after 1918, and wasn’t buried with everyone else, so perhaps he died in the First World War? Another priority for the Question List.

Around then, residential records listed all the women in the family but none of the men. It felt like they had all been conscripted. Hungary sent a higher proportion of soldiers to that war than most other nations involved, and lost them in even higher proportions. Eugene escaped all that in New York.

Lujza had married Jakab in 1893, a wedding Eugene may have attended since he was nine years old in that year. I pictured him scowling in an itchy suit, pinched by aunties, squirming. Lujza delivered Karoly within a year and Olga less than two years later.

It was difficult to keep things clear and detangled. If Lujza was Granddad Eugene’s sister, then she was my great-aunt. Her kids Karoly and Olga were Dad’s cousins, even if they never knew about each other. If Olga and Karoly lived nice long lives, their older years could have overlapped with my youth. They could have been in Budapest when I visited as a student in the late 1970s. They’d have been in their eighties. That’s a poignant, even painful, thought: my walking right past them.

On that inspiring, eye-opening first journey, I trekked all over Budapest for a few weeks. I wanted to search for family and ancestors, but it wasn’t possible. Instead, I filled my days eating goulash and cherry retesh (Hungarian strudel), going to museums and concerts, making friends who took me to wonderful folk music dancing clubs, and simply walking and walking and walking – the whole time carrying a deep sadness inside, saying, “I know I have cousins here. I know it! I could be sitting right next to them on a bus, and I’d never know.”

It’s possible I’d feel the same way – if ever I were able to return.

Now there were six in the 1906 Bye-Bye Jeno fantasy photo, adding Karoly and Olga Neufeld, pre-teens and youngest. Older teens were Klara and Margit Spitzer, followed by Margit and Karoly Stark in their mid-teens. In any case, it’s a sweet imaginary photo. “Bye-Bye Jeno” I started calling it. I’m fairly sure there is no such photo, which is why it’s all the sweeter.



In December of 2016, I looked ahead and wondered where to spend “the actual day” on my upcoming sixtieth birthday in March 2017. I was also fed up with the limits of research from afar. Not every document on earth has been digitised onto the net, after all. Finally, I couldn’t stand it any longer: I decided to go. I’d be in Budapest for my birthday – in fact, I’d give myself the whole month.

A whole month! What a treat. What an indulgence… wait, why not? Why is seeking the plain truth an indulgence? What is wrong with you, Eileen? Unearthing facts is a great cause. Also, so is strudel!

Besides, I taught English on the internet, which could be done from anywhere. I scolded myself: Forget what a sensible miser your dad was. Go! Act quickly! Do not chicken out! Do it now!

I did, fast, before I could talk myself out of it. I booked a one-way air ticket, and a studio flat with a kitchen and a monthly rate. Holy paprikash; my birthday gift was a whole month in Budapest to research our ancestry!

Would Dad be proud, I wondered? Maybe not at first, with some scowling and scratching his head, but I believed eventually he’d give in and admit that I did not have to live as he did. My life is mine, whatever anyone might think. Finally, at age sixty, I worked that out. Better later than never.

It was official! The magical mystery tour was booked.





CHAPTER VIII Planning the Big Trip



Everything was about making lists. I’d already started the Question List. Then came the Address List. Soon it had over thirty addresses and was still growing. These people lived all over the city, from 1850 to 1950. I grouped them by district. I intended to visit any place where my people stayed – and yes, I had started calling them My People.

This list grew long enough to declare district VII the winner, which decided my accommodation in the old Jewish Quarter – now an international zone. (Budapest is divided into twenty-three districts, all numbered in Roman numerals.) The Jewish Archives were right down the road, the area was handy for public transport, and I found an “apart-hotel” meaning a studio flat with kitchen, plus helpful staff like in a hotel.

As for the other neighbourhoods in the city centre, our clan’s next favourites were north of there, VI and XIII. Then some went south, VIII and IX. Therefore, I’d visit in that order. I wanted a map with pins.

I had loads of other lists, too:





The Food List


Traditional beef goulash, chicken paprikash, cold cherry soup

Lunchtime food trucks at Kazinczy street (many nations and styles, some even healthy)

Langos, anywhere (cheap bready snack dripping with things that give you a heart attack)

There was actually a vegan Budapest, which floored me





The Sweets List


Gerbeaud or Zserbo cake (walnut, apricot jam, chocolate)

Chimney cake (spirally thing baked on a spit)

Dobos cake, seven layers of chocolate buttercream, topped with caramel

Chestnut anything

And, it might be gone now, but I wished I could go to The Shop of the Hundred Strudels, from my 1977 trip. Sweet to the left, savoury to the right. I ate there every day, sometimes more than once. I gained a few kilos that month – and enjoyed every bite





Famous Hungarians List


Music: Franz Liszt, Bela Bartok, Zoltan Kodaly, Gyorgy Ligeti, Georg Solti

Show business: Billy Wilder, Alexander Korda, Michael Curtiz, Istvan Szabo, Zsa Zsa and Eva Gabor, Harry Houdini, Bela Lugosi, Peter Lorre

Football: Ferenc Puskas

Literature and Journalism: Arthur Koestler, Joseph Pulitzer

Invention and Business: Biro of ballpoint fame, Rubik of cubic fame, and, of course, George Soros





Famous people with Hungarian ancestors


Drew Barrymore, River and Joaquin Phoenix, Rachel Weisz, Jerry Seinfeld, Goldie Hawn, Tony and Jamie Lee Curtis, Johnny Weissmuller, Joyce Carol Oates, and Peter Falk (sort of)





The Cemetery List


I’d mastered the local cemetery search sites – which need all appropriate accents in place or they won’t tell you anything. I procured a list of about thirty graves of My People – or I might say Our People, since now this story had an audience. Ancestors were listed by exact section, row and plot, all in a place called the Kozma Street Jewish Cemetery. I’d been warned to have boots ready for wild, rough, tangled climbing. This Cemetery List was long enough to warrant a half-day trip, although I hadn’t quite reached the point of sizing up bus schedules.



By February, I was getting impatient. There was not much more I could do, from afar. I’d be there next month, with real archives and documents, real family graves and addresses, and eventually a real translator to help. Meanwhile, on the internet, digitised documents – all in Hungarian – were staring at me. I tried to decipher at least the main headlines. Painstakingly, I went through word by word, with patience and miles of cutting and pasting. A few basic facts emerged, although they’d be double-checked later. It looked like between 1890 and 1900, Lipot and Sarolta bought land up in the Buda hills, got a bank loan (all paid off, as agreed on a tidy graph) and erected a building there. The plans might be in the Budapest City Archives. Sarolta, unusually, was always listed as a co-owner, never just as Lipot’s wife – which was the usual form, i.e. Man’s Full Name (and wife, unnamed).

There were a few unidentified bills of sale, with them both as co-owners, at a few different addresses. They may have done this a few times. They appear to have been property developers, although I doubt that phrase existed then. On these papers, his job was either Banker or Stockbroker, sometimes Trader.

Someone posted a photo of one of their addresses; it was in district VI, Vorosmarty street 58. That made me eager to go. It was all too real, with a passer-by, a parked car, the corner crumbling. That was a must.





Siblings, children and imposters


You can stare and stare at statistics in different places, and sometimes it’s only later they connect. In 1912, Sarolta lost her husband Lipot and her father Emmanuel “Mano”, which must have been a very hard year for her. But it’s also the year her son Rudy married Aranka Hollander.

Another strange intersection occurred the year Jeno/Eugene was born, in 1884. Earlier that same year, they lost his Uncle Armin, Sarolta’s brother, aged thirty-two. What’s strange and poignant is that he died exactly one day after their brother Miksa married his Szidonia. The records said that Armin died “single and unmarried”, which seemed overly repetitive – rubbing it in, you might say. The couple’s anniversary would forever be tied to his memory.

Most of Sarolta’s siblings were dead before Jeno met them. Sarolta outlived all of them, most of them by far.

The year before Jeno was born, in 1883, they lost his Aunt Luiza Elisabeth Spitzer, age twenty-two.

Two years earlier in 1881, Uncle Jonas died, age nineteen.

Little Ede was long gone, died age six.

And the youngest, Fani, was born in 1867. She was seventeen years older than her nephew Jeno, a teen aunt. She married Jozsef Stern – and that was all I knew about her, so far.

Jeno would have known his Uncle Miksa and Aunt Szidonia quite well, I’m sure, living in the same city. Among the Jews of Budapest in that district, I have a feeling everybody knew everybody’s business, like it or not. The Spitzer girls were only a bit younger than he was. So he might not have been exactly avuncular, but perhaps big-brotherly.

Uncle Miksa was born in 1855, so he was about thirty years older – a real uncle figure in that case. As for Jeno’s cousins, Klara and Margit, I’d no idea what happened to them. I wanted to hope they had lots of healthy kids, but so far I hadn’t found any.

Also, I’d been naïvely mistaken before. When you trawl through such records, what you see again and again is that people from long ago had loads of kids, many of whom did not live long. My early discoveries of birth records evoked instant celebrations, until I remembered to check more somber statistics. Nowadays in developed countries, we expect most babies to live. Back then you might have had ten, and maybe five would see adulthood.

On the other hand, one area of research turned up a hilarious number of children. There were so many I made a large chart for parents Lipot and Sarolta, but there had to be a mistake. There were way too many children being born per year. But in every case, the parents were Lipot Kardos (born Kohn) and Sarolta Spitzer of Budapest VII.

Could there really be two couples, with identical first and last names, both men having changed from the same original surname, both couples living in the same part of the city?

Yes.

What are the odds? The odds are astronomically against that. But it was true, nevertheless.

It was only later, reading fine print and doing more translations, it emerged that our Lipot was listed as a stockbroker, and not a retailer and peddler like the other Lipot. Also, a lot of people named Kohn changed their names to Kardos in that decade. Ours did in 1888, but the other one did it later.

So, strangely enough, there were two men named Lipot Kardos, both born Kohn, both married to a Sarolta Spitzer, both living in Budapest VII, both producing lots of kids. The biggest difference was the other Lipot had children with several different women, all around the neighbourhood, in and out of his marriage. We shall leave him to one side, this peddler of fecundity. Let’s just say he’s been up and down Rumbach street.



2017, New Year’s Day and onwards, the message-bombing commenced. Two web pages were targeted. One was my undergraduate college, in Oberlin, Ohio. The other was the Hungarian genealogy group. The message was along the lines of: “Hello, I am going to Budapest where I know no one. Who has a friend there I can buy a coffee and ask newcomer questions?” I emailed messages starting, “Hello, you don’t me but…”, which I don’t like receiving, I admit. But a few kindly types replied, and I made a few coffee dates.

Through recommendations, I found a genealogist, historian and multi-lingual tour guide called Karesz (KA-res) Vandor, who would take me around the cemetery and was a specialist in Jewish Hungary. I also booked his historical tour of the Jewish Quarter, and new Budapester pen-pal Kata said she’d join me for that. Things were feeling more and more real.

Otherwise, I was open to finding anyone who knew anyone in the city, or with any sort of Hungarian connection at all. This is what Kurt Vonnegut calls a Granfalloon – a group that clings to itself for no meaningful reason, other than to provide a group – except mine was not totally meaningless, far from it.

March was declared a twenty-eight-day challenge to see if I could meet enough people to not eat alone on my birthday. I threw a gauntlet at myself, and caught it.

I tried to write to the apart-hotel in Hungarian, but I should have known better. When I got there and heard how well they spoke English, I saw how stupid this was. But the joke was on me. I later learned how essential the diacritics (accents, dots, etc.) on their words are. For example, if you write the word “thanks” without the proper accents, what you have really written is “dirt”. I’d been signing all my emails, “Dirt from Eileen.” No wonder I got no answers.



I can’t recall ever being this excited about a trip. I’d wanted this all my life. I didn’t remember much from that trip forty years ago, but the following memory is vivid.

To have a nondescript nose is quite a nice, lucky thing. I was so blessed, but there were school kids who thought otherwise. “You look like someone threw a chunk of pumpkin at your face and it just stuck there.” I was genuinely puzzled. It was just a simple, boring, practical nose. It still is. So, the teasing made no sense to me. It wasn’t the skinny narrow Anglo nose of the ruling cliques of the town. It wasn’t a Jewish nose either. None of my family’s noses were huge, extreme or unusual in any way, but we did share a certain chunky or square shape. There weren’t a lot of those in New Jersey.

My nasal revelation happened on my student trip to Budapest. There, on a tram, along a bench of side-by-side silhouettes, a dozen noses lined up, all of a similar style. I glanced down that row of chunky, squarish noses and the message was clear: Here is Your Nose. Surprise!

It’s a wonder I didn’t burst out laughing like a loony. Perhaps I did. It was forty years ago. I don’t remember everything.

The point is that some youths travel to find themselves. I found my nose.





What I knew so far about Granddad’s siblings


Roza was oldest, born 1870, married Arnold Stark.

Lujza, born 1873, married Jakab Neufeld, had two kids, but her existence turned up later, because she was born in Austria, as was:

Berta, 1874–98, who died only twenty-three. Her widower was Jozsef Peto.

Frida of the two husbands, born 1877 in Vienna, died 1945 in Budapest, so she had to endure the Second World War. Cook.

Markus, born 1878. That was all on him so far.

Rudy, born 1879, went to New York and returned, married Aranka in 1912. Banker.

Eugene, born 1884, died 1948 in New York. Seven grandchildren, some of whom he never met.



That’s where the story stood as I packed my bags. Finally, it was time to go. A neighbour noticed me bumping my suitcase down the steps.

“Where are you going?”

“Budapest. Hungary.”

“Really? You have people there?”

“Yes.”

“Family?”

“Yes.”

“Nice. Who’s there? Which family?”

“I’m not sure. First I have to find them.”

This was the challenge, pure and simple. Game on.





CHAPTER IX Budapest Week One, March 2017



It was a journey of “first this, then that” patterns. All the way along I thought I was late but wasn’t. Seated behind me was a volatile, screaming baby, but we made friends. The flight was long and only a bit late, but I missed my connection to Budapest. That flipped my stomach over, with a momentary pang of heartache. But, if this trip took forty years, what’s another day?

The delay had unexpected silver linings, the first of which emerged just before landing. We flew over the city at dawn, ogling the Danube and all its pretty bridges, St Margaret’s Island, the Buda hills with the castle on the left, the Pest side with Parliament and the city centre to the right, heading east. Passengers oo-ed and ahh-ed, while others routinely returned home, either bored or relieved. My heart was pounding. This was a happy accident: last night I would not have seen this.

Past the suburbs, towards the airport, on the outskirts, was a vast and beautiful cemetery, striking and elegant from above. A massive circular lane was in the centre with many straight paths emanating out like sunrays. By the main entrance was a great white U-shaped edifice that looked familiar – yes! I’d seen photos. In fact, I’d been studying photos and information for months. It was the Kozma Street Cemetery. It had to be. This was to be one of my first stops, with the Cemetery List. We had at least thirty relations buried there, but I was sure I’d find more. Thirty relations, I thought, looking down. Suddenly, tears poured forth, so I turned to the window and let them roll.

If the flight had been on time last night, I’d have missed this sight too.

And, as if that weren’t sweet enough, this auspicious welcome was on that one day in the year which, the groaner joke says, is the only day of the year that tells you what to do:

March forth!





Day One, settling into district VII


It was a day of grey rain and practicalities such as groceries, Hungarian SIM cards, phone and computer aggro (mostly solved but not all), plus walking around the neighbourhood. I’m sometimes wary when things go suspiciously to plan. But in fact, I had the weekend to adjust to the new time zone, and awoke ready as a cat to jump on Monday morning.

First things first: I briefly met Karesz, historian-genealogist-researcher, at the Family Research Centre behind the Great Synagogue. First impressions were that he was taller, warmer and friendlier than one can see from his website. He would turbo-research whatever he could with the List of Ancestors I gave him – in particular, basic vital records: birth, marriage, death – and I’d have scans and translations by the end of the week, probably right before our day at Kozma Street Cemetery. If I tried to do this myself, I’d be learning these ropes over weeks if not months, and would still miss things.

The first routine established was Grid Walks. To learn the city, I covered it street by street, district by district, starting with base camp in the VII. I started with nice, long north–south streets, up one and down the next, across a whole area. Alternate days I did the east–west streets. I tried to walk every street at least once.



Neighbourhood walk highlights from Week One, random and unexpected:

A small library branch was equipped with hammocks. I say that is a stroke of genius and should be obligatory worldwide. I love and believe in libraries. I used to work in one, and if ever I do again, I’ll propose the hammock option.

Out on the streets were pedal-bars. This was an open-sided pickup truck with a canopy-roof. Two rows of (young, drunk) people faced each other, all pedalling exercise-type bikes to propel the vehicle. What propelled the pedallers was loud music and a steady supply of alcohol from the fully equipped bar in the middle. The enthusiastic bartender/DJ was lead dancer and bottle-juggler. Everyone bobbed, pedalled, and laughed like hyenas. It looked annoying and lucrative.

That first morning, I stocked the kitchen – the only way I can be content anywhere on earth. My first impressions of my local supermarket were that it was nearly impossible to get a breakfast cereal not coated in chocolate. Not much choice in rice, but bags of choice in dumplings and noodles. Not much pita bread, loads of heavy dark German rye and the usual white rubbish. Thank heavens for a self-service fruit-and-veg weighing-and-tagging machine with pictures for illiterates like me. Generally, although, many people spoke English.

This was totally different forty years ago. Then, the older generation spoke to you in German, and if that didn’t work, they shouted in German. I spoke no German, so I got yelled at a lot – for the nicest possible reasons. In the private apartment where I stayed, the stout elderly housekeeper yelled at me helpfully in German the entire time. She gave me lots of strudel and strong coffee, and forced me to smoke terrible cigarettes with her – awful things like tar-sticks that made me ill. I was too young and easily bullied to say no, so I was up all night, nauseated.

At that time, Hungary’s younger generation was forced to learn Russian but refused to use it, understandably, since it was the language of their tormenters and conquerors. I did half a year of Russian language study in high school, partly because in the USA, that was a rebellious gesture and also it helped me escape science classes. A big plus was Mrs Zmachinsky, or Madame Zed as she was known and loved – a great scholar visiting from Ukraine, linguistic genius, charismatic teacher, funny grandma and all-round dazzler. I’d have studied any subject she taught just because she was so damned clever, masterful, and cool.

Here in Budapest, Russian was not cool. I shut my mouth about my fifty words. I was grateful the Hungarian alphabet was roughly similar to mine, even with all the diacritical marks.





Nightmare district turned hipster


District VII, which used to be the hideous Jewish Ghetto of the Second World War, was now rather groovy. There were cool young dudes with sculpted beards and designer babies. There were also cool old dudes with silver goatees and rakishly tilted berets, smoking roll-ups between thumb and index finger. There was vegan this, imported that. Now I could overeat in all kinds of new and trendy ways.

Meanwhile, it was useful to cross-reference my Food List with the ancestral Address List, all by district, obviously. As I hunted for where we used to live, I ate my way along. Therefore, after my chickpea burger at the Food Karavan Alley on Kazinczy street, I bumped along the cobbles to the other end of the street where Great-Aunt Frida lived and died. She was somewhere near the corner of Kiraly street.

I found the place, and even got inside. There were two places, said the paperwork. She’d been living at number 54 on the corner, now half public administration office and half apartment block. But Frida actually died at number 44, a bit further down the street, now a row of swanky wine bars. It was the nearest place, the closest pin on my map, so I made it my first evening walk destination.

It’s odd how attached you can become to characters you have never met. In this case, it was long-deceased relations, but they may as well be fictional. So far, I didn’t know much about any of them; however, there were a few shreds about Frida.

Her full first name was Friederika, but Frida was her preferred choice. She was the youngest of Granddad’s four older sisters. She lived from 1877 to 1945, and her profession was listed as Cook. It was surprising this middle-class daughter worked outside the home or had a profession at all. No evidence of children had surfaced so far, so this was high up on the Question List. I expected that to be the longest list of all, possibly endless.

Frida was married twice. It wasn’t yet clear how or why she got out of her first marriage – to Sandor Gomori (SHAN-dor GER-mer-y). I don’t know why but I feared it was an ugly divorce. Then I saw that he died in 1902 after only six years of marriage. Frida then married Elemer Szente in 1904. At first glance, it looked like Frida and Elemer were together to the end, both nearly seventy years old. They both died in the Ghetto, in 1945. I’d soon learn more. A historical tour of the old Jewish Quarter had also been booked.





Frida and Elemer, then and now


On 17 January 1945, in the Battle of Budapest, the Soviet Army invaded the city, repelled the Nazis and “liberated” the city by taking it for themselves.

Frida died a couple of weeks before that, just one day after her husband’s birthday. She was sixty-seven. Her death certificate said she died of gangrene of the thigh and heart failure. Elemer died that year too, although I did not yet know exactly when. It was possible my trip to the cemetery would reveal more. Or maybe the answer would be in the stack of documents I was awaiting.

Near Kazinczy street 44, there was a modern building – a standard cheap pre-fab thing – housing the Hungarian Dance Academy. It was a busy place, I was happy to see, with crowds of young people coming and going. I couldn’t help but be cheered up by the sound of wild fiddles and the robust stomping of boots.

Numbers 54 and 56 were part of a huge block on the corner, now a pretty pink. It was all a bit crumbly, but still standing, which was how I felt too. I was photographing the front, the funny old wooden shutters and the elaborately carved wooden doors, when I noticed at my elbow a group of three people. There was a professional photographer looking cynical, a suited guy looking business-like, and a warmly smiling lady eager to speak to me. The guys were not. They were glum. She was perky.

“Do you like it?”

“Yes.”

“Is it beautiful – to you?”

“Sure.”

“But it’s old, and the paint not so good. It’s still beautiful?”

“Yes. To me.”

“You know this place? Why do you photograph this place?”

“My family lived here. A long time ago.”

She got very excited, and explained this to the men, who did not react or care in the least. This did not diminish her smiling. She asked if I wanted to see the inside. Of course I did. I’d been hoping if I hung around one of these places long enough, I’d get invited inside. I was in luck on my very first day.

She said she needed a favour. She’d just bought an apartment in this block, totally renovated it, and wanted to rent it to tourists. She wanted my opinion. Would I come have a look? She chummily linked arms with me, and led me inside the massive gate, across the cobbled courtyard, and up the spiralling, ancient, stone stairs.

Unlike the old exterior, inside the apartment was swish, brand new and full of gadgets and appliances. Everything was chrome or glass, against a zingy colour scheme of red and black. I said she’d have no trouble renting it out, and could ask a good price since it slept four (clever loft) and was in a great area. I thought lots of people liked an old-fashioned exterior but a modern interior. She looked sceptical. I photographed the courtyard, its wrought-iron balconies surrounding the cobbled centre. I could easily imagine it in 1944, stuffed with ragged people getting what air they could, however wintry, in this courtyard open to the sky. This was in the heart of the Ghetto back then, and she was sensitive to this. Her bubbliness became respectful when she asked when Frida was here. I said she died here during the war. She said how sorry she was, and gently touched my arm.

When she showed me out, as I was wishing her luck, she explained how she’d invested everything she had in this venture. Everything, she emphasised nervously. She had never done anything like this before. This was a big first step for her and she was extremely jittery. She might be in her late thirties, and must have been saving and hoping all her adult life for this chance. I wanted her to succeed. She said I was the first foreigner to see the place, and her first good review. She was so excited, she cried out emotionally that I was bringing her good luck, and she hugged me with a surprising amount of strength. She had one more question.

“Is Airbnb a good website?”

“Sure. There are others, too.” I sent her some links.

I smiled all the way home. The fiddles and the boots were still doing their gutsy thing when I went by.

It was only the start of Week One. The cemetery trip was next. I felt profoundly happy to be here.





CHAPTER X Kozma Street Cemetery, and the First Wave of News


This was more than a vast, vast place. It was a vast, vast universe.

Most people came by car. There was only the very occasional, tired-looking cyclist and I saw no walkers. It was just too huge – the largest Jewish cemetery in Europe. Much of it was well mapped and marked, but not all. Much was either thick jungle or moderately passable jungle. It was best to be escorted by Karesz, who knew the place and all its inconsistencies.

It was cold, grey, drizzling and miserable, this early March. At least the leaves were gone, and you could see where you were going. Apparently, it was easier if the ground was either dry or frozen. He’d warned me about the rough ground, so I wore shoes that could be ruined, cheapies bought for this purpose.

It was more than handy that Karesz could translate Hebrew, Yiddish and Hungarian into English, since the gravestones had some of each. He knew history, various customs, and how to navigate the place. Every grave’s location consisted of block-row-plot. Finding the huge block was easy enough. But which row? Did they number from this end, or that? It was not exactly systematic.

When there was no clue, he located a spot where his phone got coverage, and went to the cemetery’s website. (This never worked for me, because it insisted on diacritics, whereas I and my devices can’t cope with them.) He looked up a nearby name, got its row and grave number, got his bearings like a compass, and thrashed further into the brush. He also had garden gloves, a trowel and clippers.

That morning was spent tromping through frozen mud, counting rows or grave numbers, and indeed finding most of the people on my list. Almost all our gravestones were there and intact. Some of them were so old, the lettering wasn’t clear, but most were remarkably legible.





Great-grandparents first


Although my list was meticulously ordered according to the map, I asked to start with Lipot and Sarolta as the trunk of this tree. They were easy to find, but the huge headstone had fallen over, face down, cracked neatly in two. He said that the fact it had fallen was good luck, in that it was probably un-weathered and in good shape. We were able to prise both pieces up and, sure enough, they were clear as day. There was an abbreviated “souls together forever” blessing, and their names, large and simple.

It’s very difficult to describe the feeling that moved through me when I saw my own surname there. Real great-grandparents, buried here. I can only say that every cell jangled, from head to toe, in a kind of electricity fizzing through all my DNA.

After photographing it from every possible angle, I imagined this huge, plain, strong, simple stone suggested they were a strong couple, a tight team. I don’t know where such guesses come from, but that stone announced them as a formidable duo.





Their seven offspring: Roza, Lujza, Berta, Frida, Markus, Rezso/Rudy, Jeno/Eugene


Lipot and Sarolta’s oldest was Roza Kohn, who was born in 1870 on Rumbach street, Budapest VII. In 1888, at age eighteen, her name became Roza Kardos, as organised by her dad. From 1918 until 1945, she lived on Sziv street 54, district VI. We do not know where she was buried, or even if she was buried. In those times, many were disposed of in ways you might not want to know.

Sziv (“heart”) street was north of the Ghetto, so she may have somehow avoided it, which seems miraculous. But some people hid. Or some were lucky enough to get fake papers, to appear Christian. She was very lucky to survive, and also very unlucky to survive.

Back in 1890, age twenty, Roza married Arnold Stark, thirty-three, a stockbroker like her dad. Arnold died in 1925, age sixty-seven, and that’s the grave that we found here. They had a daughter named Margit, and sons Karoly plus a newly-discovered Oszkar, after a long gap. I knew nothing else about any of them. But, we found a couple of surprises. Roza and Arnold had more children than just those three. They had five. There were two more names on Arnold’s stone. Daughter Paula, who died of gastroenteritis in 1911 age seventeen (which killed her dad Arnold, too, fourteen years later), and another son, Imre, who also died the same year as Arnold, in 1925. Imre was twenty-eight.

I had to stop and think twice about that. In 1925, Roza buried both her son and her husband.

I was also bowled over at suddenly finding they did not have three kids, but five. Not everything is on paper or on the internet. Surprises were lurking, I could feel them out there.





Did someone say hello to Elemer?


Frida and second husband Elemer were also very much on my mind on this trip to the cemetery. Although I’d just been to the street where she last lived, I did not know where she was buried and assumed it was in one of the mass graves of that time, of which there were several in this city. However, Elemer’s grave was here.

Karesz pointed out, with some surprise, that there was a round stone right in the centre of the plot, in a way that suggested it was placed there. It couldn’t have just leapt up. It had been placed to say that someone had visited, and paid respect in that traditional mark of remembrance. I’ll remain curious about that for the rest of my life. If someone else honoured Elemer, like I was doing, I’ll never know who it was. Or was it a well-meaning stranger?

Well-meaning strangers were becoming a theme. I was reminded of Nelson Mandela’s statement that we are all one family, just in different colours. On a smaller scale, perhaps I was surrounded by cousins, but not likely to be formally introduced. This could be maddening, going in circles.

My other question about Frida, of course, was whether or not she had children. Nothing on Elemer’s gravestone indicated any. We proceeded through the rough, thorny clutter and, one by one, found almost all of the ancestors on my list. I photographed everything in detail and scribbled down everything Karesz translated. And the others? Could I find anything about them? Some yes, some no.





Other Kardos branch news


Lujza? No news at all.

Berta, who died so young? Don’t know where she’s buried. Waiting for more documents.

Markus? His gravestone was unlike any other I would see: splendid, smooth and minimalistic. It only had his dates and his title as Director of the Phoebus Company. Nothing about a wife, children or loved ones. No blessing, no Hebrew, no ornamentation. Everything square, polished, hard-edged and cool. I instantly formed an unsubstantiated theory that he too was square, polished, hard-edged and cool – a single man, single-minded and ambitiously workaholic. I toyed with the theory he was secretly gay, putting all his energy into his career.

Rudy was nowhere to be found.





Other Spitzer branch news


I learned the name of my GGM (great-great-grandmother). Sarolta’s mother was Johanna Nathan, buried with her husband, Mano Spitzer. Sarolta’s father died in 1912, the same year her husband Lipot died – a hard year for her. Mano and Johanna’s joint gravestone was just barely legible, and whoever arranged for the engraving filled the entire stone with verbiage and prettiness. Mano and Johanna were there together, under many blessings and carved florets.

This simple discovery of her parents’ names meant hope for finding others; for example, Sarolta’s aunts and uncles, if any. There could always be more cousins.





Sarolta’s six siblings


Sarolta’s brother Armin died young, but his grave could not be located.

Her next brother, Miksa and his wife Szidonia, were remembered by “their children and grandchildren”, but sadly not by name. Recent documents clarified they actually had five kids – Lujza, Gizella, Klara, Margit, and after a gap, as often happened – Oszkar. So, which of them produced grandkids? That went right to the top of the Question List, creeping nicely towards my own lifetime and perhaps some real living people.

Miksa’s daughter Klara married Istvan Revesz in 1913, then divorced in 1924. No sign of kids. Understandably, she was put to rest far from The Ex, closer to her parents. She died in 1963, which was thrillingly within my lifetime.

Sarolta’s youngest sister Fani was buried with husband, Jozsef Stern, in theory – but this was under a very large mound of thick vines. If “loving children” were carved into the scenario, there was no way of knowing.

Her siblings Luiza Elizabeth, Jonas and Eduard all died young, and their graves could not be located.





The Still Undiscovered List


At the bottom of my now muddy page was a long poignant list of all the graves and death certificates yet to be located. And, as is typical of research, or maybe all learning, every question that’s answered produces a dozen new questions. For every person whose grave we found, there were others unaccounted for – mostly during 1944–45, when so very many people died in unknown circumstances. Those were being added to the Question List for continued research elsewhere. I was not hopeful. But today we visited everyone on that original list.

Frozen and happy, driving back through the big gates, we waved again at the nice guy who let us in. By the gate was a flower stall, even although this is not Jewish tradition. Most visitors here favoured the ancient way of leaving a pretty, round pebble to say the deceased are remembered, the way somebody had remembered Great-Uncle Elemer.

Karesz shrugged and said, “Traditions change. People change.”

I am not big on cut flowers in any case. A garden is another matter. I have strolled through many a cemetery, and I never brought anything physical to lay down there. To do so seemed the opposite of what we need to accept, which is giving up the physical. I tried to bring my best, most respectful attitude and I kept that person in mind and in heart. I might imagine the dialogue if they could be here. And, in particular, in the case of these ancestors who were abandoned and forgotten, now they were honoured and remembered. That was the purpose, that day: to remember those forgotten.

Karesz understood perfectly. We drove back to civilisation.





The next avalanche of information


It’s one thing to be given a marvellous stack of scanned historical documents. It’s another to wait days for the translation. After the Kozma trip, these translations rained down on my head, and like a kid, I metaphorically danced in that rain. The email arrived in the evening and I leapt into action, running downstairs to ask the nice reception guy (they were all nice) to print it for me. In fact, I didn’t even change out of my pyjama bottoms, which I decided could almost look like trousers. I don’t think he noticed.

Maybe they don’t care, if you’re sober and well spoken. The usual clientele are loud, drunken louts or loud bratty tourists. Besides, the staff knew and liked my purpose here and refused my offer to pay for printing. Whoever printed out my Cemetery List added to the note a pink drawing of a flower. Another, Kevin, mentioned that his mother used to work in the same Jewish archive where I intended to go, and he smiled that my project was a good thing to do – an important thing to do. They all emphasised they were open 24/7. I had backup.

It was like this outside too. Everywhere I asked directions, they asked what I was doing there, and when they heard about my mission, they always smiled and asked more. Since I was always asking directions, I spoke to dozens of people this way. Eventually, they collectively promoted me a smidgen up to a better class of tourist, closer and more serious than the usual type, almost distant family. Come to think of it, actually distant family. Anyway, my reward that evening was six pages of text summarising sixty major turning points in the lives of these ancestors. I went a bit weak at the knees.

Half of these sixty documents were from the civil records (after 1895) and half from the Jewish records. There were births, marriages, deaths, and a lot to take in. Now, finally, with these scans, more of the overall picture could be pieced together.

“This is a big family,” Karesz commented, as though there was plenty more to the saga – and so there was.





Frida’s saga


Frida wasn’t childless. In her younger days, Frida did indeed have a son, with her first husband Sandor Gomori – who had been born Goldstein. There was a bit of an age difference between Frida and Sandor: when they married in 1896, he was thirty-one and she was nineteen. He’d been living on Kazinczy street 35, then moved in with her family on Vorosmarty street 58. It must have been a large place, big enough to accommodate various extended family living there at various times.

Sandor’s profession when he married was Upholsterer. Two years later, in 1898 when son Laszlo was born, he was upgraded to Furniture Merchant. His shop was in the grottier part of the VIII, an area where I was advised not to walk alone late at night. When Laszlo was four, in 1902, Sandor died of peritonitis at the hospital of the Budapest Israelite Community. He was thirty-seven. Frida remarried two years later.

My heart leapt to learn that Laszlo got married to one Adel Bek, another Budapester, in November 1939, when he was forty-one, and she was thirty-four. Poor Laszlo died scarcely six years later, in the spring of 1945. He lived longer than his father, but very few people in this clan lived past 1945. He survived the Nazis and the Communists, but not tuberculosis.

His death certificate said: “Laszlo Gomori, 46, resident at district II, Kaplar street 5… died at district XII, Diosarok street 1 (a hospital).” Laszlo was living in the II – he crossed the river?

Let me explain: as with many cities split by a river, the two sides are two different worlds. This is especially true here, where for centuries Buda and Pest used to be two separate cities on either side of the Danube. They were combined relatively late in their history to form Budapest.

Laszlo was up in the Buda hills, unlike almost all the rest of the family, but he died on the Pest side. His widow Adel outlived him, but I do not know for how long. This document implied his mother Frida was alive, but that’s either an error or an omission. Frida died in January 1945, Laszlo died that April.

A detail from his marriage certificate leapt out at me and bopped me on the nose: “On 10 November 1939 Laszlo Gomori, writer…” Really? What did he write? Please let me not be the only such freak in this clan. We tended to produce nurses, teachers, technical and sensible people. This was added to the Question List. The mystery of Laszlo and Adel’s possible offspring had to wait too.

Laszlo and Adel’s marriage document also threw light on the whereabouts of Uncle Rudy. At first, all I knew was he went to New York but returned to Budapest, where he married Aranka Hollander in 1912, and got a job at a bank. He lived at least to the age of fifty-six in 1935 when he was the one who reported his mother Sarolta’s death. More clues were needed. Now here he was, a wedding witness, which added four years to his profile. He was sixty in 1939, an avuncular, dignified older witness for young newlyweds. Great-Uncle Rudy was creeping slowly towards a nicely advanced old age. Whether he got past 1944–45 was the question.



Also in 1945, Frida and second husband Elemer Szente both died in the Ghetto. I was hoping they were together, a comfort in awful times. I had a feeling they never had their own family, and maybe they were the sort of couple who turn all their love towards each other, as lovebirds, albeit childless.

How wrong a person can be.

They had a daughter, Angyalka (AN-jal-ka), and her marriage record said: “On 31 July 1932, Jozsef Suto, painter, r. Catholic, born on 13 May 1899 in Budapest, resident at Rottenbiller street 5/c, son of late Janos Suto and late Martia Hoffer, married Angyalka Szente, born on 20 August 1905 in Budapest, resident at Visegradi street 19, daughter of Elemer Szente and Frida Kardos. Witnessed by Odon Balla and Jolan Peto, wife of Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz.”

Witness Jolan was the daughter of Berta Kardos Peto (Frida’s sister). Angyalka was twenty-six when she married, and, unlike the usual uncles and older males, her witness was her cousin Jolan, then thirty-six. Perhaps she was a kind of older sister figure?

I wanted to know whether Angyalka’s new husband Jozsef was a house painter or an artistic painter. We weren’t exactly overflowing with creative types in our present-day clan, so on my way to the translation website, I was betting he was the practical sort of humble house painter.

Wrong again. He was an artistic painter. There was no further evidence, which went for whatever Laszlo was writing, too. A struggling artist and a writer? Or, if you want to be cynical, café artists and pipe dreamers? No evidence either way.

As for her marrying a Roman Catholic, and religious inter-marrying, that could mean anything.

After the thrill of receiving so much information, it was counterbalanced by the news of the death by suicide of Elemer Szente, Frida’s second husband. In late 1944, he died of gas poisoning on his first day of incarceration in the Budapest Ghetto, not in early 1945 as I’d assumed. The Ghetto was created on 29 November 1944, and Elemer died the very next day. I wondered if he was frail, at seventy, and could not survive the move. No, it was noted as a probable suicide. I needed time to take that in. This had never crossed my mind. It stopped me cold. Later, more resigned, I reluctantly accepted that choice in his plight, but I felt so bad for both of them.

Although he died in the VII, his address was listed as in the V. Frida never lived in the V. Was that a business address, or were they no longer under one roof? This was not clear. But, near the end, they were not in the same place. I didn’t want to believe they had split. I wanted some other explanation.

His death was reported and registered on 15 January 1945, just two days before the liberation of the Ghetto. But he actually died less than two months earlier, on Wesselenyi street, Budapest VII, right around the corner from where I was staying. It’s now a school, but during the war, it was a hospital. I can’t imagine it was equipped in any way, so perhaps infirmary would be a better word. Nowadays I often walked by that place, thinking: Poor Elemer. Poor Frida.





News of Eugene’s siblings


The widow Roza Kardos Stark and her spinster daughter Margit stayed in the Sziv street place. They both died in 1945. Roza died at home, of gastroenteritis rather than from any action by the Nazis or Communists so far as we know. Margit, profession listed as Clerk, also died in that house, a week before her mother, of “heart weakness”. That threw new light on her mother’s death. It’s not the natural way for the daughter to die before the mother, so perhaps Roza died of a weakened heart too, after watching her daughter die. Neither of their remains or burial place could be located – so far.

There was more about Roza and Arnold Stark’s sons.

Born in 1892, Karoly was another stockbroker, like his dad and his Granddad Lipot. He was married in 1921 to Gabriella Lichstein, ten years his junior. He changed his surname to Saghelyi in 1934 and his wife changed hers to Lenard in 1948 – and I’d give a lot to know why. He was a military veteran of the First World War, as per a memorial decree issued by the Command of the 1st Pest National Guard Mixed Brigade. He converted to Lutheranism in 1938; his wife did the same in 1943. Lots of Jewish people did that in those years, under duress. There was no further information.

Karoly’s brother Oszkar was six years younger, born in 1898 and got married in 1933 to Roman Catholic Maria Zubek. She was divorced, so therefore maybe she was not strictly Catholic. In 1934 he changed his surname to Szives, maybe after the ancestral home on Sziv street. Sziv means heart, Szives means kindly.

It’s possible Roza Kardos Stark outlived every single one of her children, which really shouldn’t be. The only hope was that some of the young ones lived beyond 1945. This remained to be seen.





Miscellaneous discoveries


Miksa Spitzer changed the family surname to Szende in July 1919. In December 1919, as Miksa Szende, he attended the wedding of his second daughter Gizella to Zoltan Vajda, a banker. Miksa’s eldest daughter Lujza had married Salamon Nagy, a lawyer, in 1908, and Klara married Istvan Revesz in 1913. Margit, the youngest daughter, was married three times. Baby Oszkar married and divorced. Many of them changed name or religion or both.

Oh, there was more. There was plenty more. This was a full soap opera in the making.

These newly discovered cousins were Eugene’s contemporaries. There were now fifteen kids in the Bye-Bye Jeno fantasy photo. Eldest were Lujza and Gizi Spitzer, in their early twenties like Eugene. Next were Klara Spitzer and the two Margits (Stark, Spitzer) in their mid- to late-teens. This girl gang would have dominated: the oldest boys, the two Karolys (Stark, Neufeld), just barely teens. They were followed by younger boys Oszkar and Imre Stark, Laszlo Gomori and little Oszkar Spitzer. Second tier girls: Paula Stark a preteen, Olga Neufeld and Jolan Peto were eleven and ten, which made me hope they were friends, and (newly-discovered) baby Lili was eight.

None of them knew what was ahead. It’s eerie to look back, knowing what they did not.



As far as my new ’hood the VII was concerned, I no longer needed grid walks for getting acquainted but only to stretch my legs and appreciate the beautiful architecture, which was everywhere. I often went past that red-brick school on Wesselenyi street. Every time, I thought of Elemer. He was in there somewhere, deciding to die soon rather than after unthinkable suffering.

This school that became a hospital and then a school again, was always very noticeable in its context. In this city filled with the most ornate architecture possible, it stood out with its plain red brick, practical simplicity and elegant but subtle lines. It was not trying to look decadent and luxurious. It was like a classic dignified three-piece suit in a room full of frilly dresses. Now it was a combined nursery, general and primary, secondary and vocational school.

A plaque outside said: “To the memory of all those who worked to alleviate suffering, to self-sacrifice, to the victims of Fascism, to the nurses working with their healing. Erected on the 50th anniversary of the Holocaust. The People’s Ministry.”

Elemer and others are remembered, every single day.





CHAPTER XI Margit Spitzer, Our Zsa Zsa, 1890–?



Much of this research involved wanting to find someone, anyone, who lived past the Second World War. There wasn’t much comic relief. However, we have some now. My nomination for the Gold-digging Multi-Marriage Award goes to Margit Szende (born Spitzer), who lived from 1890 until we-don’t-know-when, but it sounds like she was ingenious, resilient and attractive.

This was Granddad’s cousin, the daughter of his Uncle Miksa and Aunt Szidonia. They had four daughters: Lujza, Gizella, Klara and Margit, followed by a gap and a surprise boy, Oszkar. Somehow, as with most clichés, one can believe that the fourth of four girls might play baby princess. We’ll never know. Whatever her technique, Margit was good at finding rich husbands. She found three in a row.

Wedding number one was in 1916, when she was twenty-six. I wonder why she waited so long. Maybe she was picky. On a cool 7 November, she married Erno Kurzweil, a glass factory owner, nine years her senior. He lived at Sziv street 48, a close neighbour of the Spitzers. I feel Sarolta would have thoroughly checked out this neighbour on behalf of her niece. Both witnesses at the wedding were people outside the family, which was unusual. In those days, these were usually family members. The marriage lasted eight years, and was dissolved in the spring of 1924 when Margit was thirty-four.

Marriage number two was still a mystery, but later records listed her as a widow living in the city centre. All her addresses looked privileged. Every time she married, she upgraded her residence. Elusive Husband Two was added to the Question List, without much optimism. She outlived him, whoever he was.

Marriage number three was in April 1936. She was forty-six and he was fifty-four. She was going for high status. Lieutenant General Oszkar Ignacz Alajos Maliczki was retired from the Hungarian Royal National Guard. Although she was born Jewish, suddenly here she was Calvinist, having converted a mere few months before. The groom was a Roman Catholic who didn’t seem to care she was a divorcee. That’s enough loopholes to knit matching sweaters for next winter. I still hoped it somehow worked. A nice Jewish girl seeing the light and marrying a Catholic army general in 1938 was inspired thinking. The witnesses included her brother-in-law Salamon Nagy (Lujza’s husband), plus an unknown doctor.

It’s odd there was no info on her previous offences. Normally they list all surnames of a divorced and/or widowed woman, or in this case, both. Were there too many? Her full collection of surnames was Spitzer Szende Kurzweil Another-Guy Maliczki. Maybe the clerk shortened all that.

We’d found the Zsa Zsa Gabor of the Kardos clan.

As for that third marriage in 1936, I didn’t know when Margit or the Lieutenant General died. I wanted to believe his connections saved them, or that Margit was clever enough to somehow outlive the Nazis and all their many collaborators, followed by the Communists who brought misery to all, not just the Jews. Her survival would be a fact worth finding.

Around that same time, the original Zsa Zsa – not yet nine-times married – escaped Hungary in 1941 shortly before the Nazi invasion, so she was a survivor too. She died in 2016, having expressed the poignant but impossible wish for her ashes to be buried with her beloved father, Vilmos Gabor, a soldier, buried in Kozma Street Cemetery. Strictly speaking, Jewish people are never supposed to be cremated – a fact she seems to have forgotten. Our Eugene’s widow Anna “forgot”, too.

However, modern times changing as they do, this cemetery reluctantly created a separate area for burials of the rebellious ashes of non-conformists, although mingling those ashes in the kosher section is still, firmly, not an option. I imagine Zsa Zsa thought she was an exception to any rule. She was a star, darling – or is that spelled ‘dahlink’? Anyway, this was one time she had to take “No” for an answer, albeit posthumously. Instead, the star of Frankenstein’s Great Aunt Tillie and Won Ton Ton, the Dog Who Saved Hollywood, had her ashes buried in Beverly Hills.





CHAPTER XII Official Guided Tour of the VII



Karesz was our guide. I shared the tour with new acquaintance Kata, who arrived suitably bundled up for the cold. I’d connected with her indirectly through university ties and we’d had a fun lunch together. She’s a PhD student, researching right-wing groups in Hungary and the UK – why people join and like them. She herself is way to the left, is Canadian-Hungarian, with one Jewish parent and one Christian, like Eugene.

The following is based on my fallible memory and whatever I was moved to scribble down in my Little Black Book. It is not meant as a definitive guide to the huge flood of information that day. We met on a cold but clear March day, not spring-like in the least. We quickly passed by the Shot Bar, the icky kebab place, icky pizza place, Full Moon Thai Massage place, and turned onto Dohany street, which means tobacco – which is what this area was all about long ago.

I mentioned several eateries in the area that seemed to discourage trade. The staff usually blocked the entrance, smoking aggressively and glaring. Were they money laundering operations? Or, with older people, it could be leftover grumpiness from Communist habits. It’s hard to know.

We passed a place with the slogan “Budapest Eats Fingers!” They did burgers, fried chicken and surprises. Another burger joint boasted the slogan “Beer, not just a breakfast drink”. Commerce turned more upmarket as we walked along.

Eventually, we arrived at what used to be the area’s mikvah, a traditional Jewish women’s ritual bath house. It was now a five-star hotel. It had a bold, wildly decorated façade, larger than life-sized statues of three human bodies writhing in a ménage à trois. Traffic often slowed around here, I noticed, as beautiful people unloaded their poodles.

In the mid-1800s, this area was mainly German-speaking rather than Yiddish. Some people do not use the phrase Jewish Quarter because Jews were living all over the city with no limitation, but this area contained the highest concentration in one place.

In the Second World War, the main ghetto was created in this district. Now we were in sombre territory. Although many people were deported to Nazi death camps or work camps, others were held here, imprisoned and left to die. It was mostly old folks, women and children.



We sometimes use the word ghetto to indicate a poor part of town. This was not that. This Ghetto was a sort of house arrest or huge prison, encasing many city blocks. It was created in November 1944 by decree of the Royal Hungarian Government. The area was surrounded by a high fence and stone wall, in turn surrounded by armed guards. Non-Jews were moved out while Jews were collected up and imprisoned within the walls – on average fourteen people to a room. No one escaped alive until the war was over.

No food or medicine went in. No rubbish, waste, sewage or dead bodies went out. Periodically, a few hundred or even a few thousand people were rounded up and loaded onto cattle-cars that went directly to a death camp. Of those who stayed, many died of typhoid. The Jewish population of Budapest was reduced from 200,000 to 70,000. Great-Aunt Frida and Great-Uncle Elemer died there. Others of our relations may have died there too, but were added to the mass graves, and therefore those deaths were not recorded. Many families have an Unaccounted For List.

As we walked along, Karesz talked about what led up to the creation of this Ghetto. Admiral Horthy was Regent, head of Hungary during that time, until 1945. He’d been in power since 1920, after a very short period of Communist rule from 1919 to 1920, a mere 133 days of terror. Some say Horthy had no idea what Hitler intended to do with the Jews and others declared enemies of the Nazis. Others insist he knew very well.

It was during the Horthy years that anti-Semitic laws crept in. There were at first the “closed numbers” laws, which greatly limited how many Jews could enter university or certain professions such as medicine, law and engineering. This began in 1920, but during the 1930s the restrictions became extreme.





Hungary was not invaded by the Nazis until 1944, sparked by Horthy’s actions when he saw Germany was losing the war. He had originally sided with the Nazis because they promised Hungary would regain territory it lost in the previous war (two-thirds of its land mass and all of its coastline). This was not to be. So, he sought a separate agreement with the other side, the Allies. A secret message was sent to the USA, but it was discovered. That betrayal was punished with the invasion of Budapest.

Deportations for the “Final Solution” used a direct train line from Hungary straight to Auschwitz. This train line could have been bombed by the Allies, and many pleaded for this. However, the Allies’ efforts were focused on winning the war, not on saving victims.

So, on 19 March 1944, it was a relatively small group of Nazis who invaded Hungary, among them Adolf Eichmann, coordinator of the Final Solution. They had support from locals already persecuting Jews to the maximum, now helping transport them to prisons and onto death-trains.



We arrived at the large wall with a map of this Ghetto near the other end of Dohany street with a kosher grocery next to it. The map told us about the old Jewish Quarter, about how it thrived once. It showed the huge area that was used for the Ghetto, with a large boulevard on each side. The northern boundary ran jaggedly along Kiraly street, Erzsebet on the east, Dohany on the south, and Karoly on the west.

A car approached and slowed down. The driver rolled down his window, made some gesture I didn’t quite see, and quickly sped away. Karesz looked a bit annoyed or insulted.

“Did you see that?”

“Not exactly. Was it a thumbs up?”

“No.”

“Was it saying, ‘We are with you’?”

“No.”

“Was it a ‘fuck you’ kind of thing?”

“Yes. That’s exactly what it was.”

We just sighed. What else can one do? At least it was no more than that.



Budapest today has a population of about 1.5 million. A few years ago, it was two million. For many years, the second largest Hungarian city, after Budapest, was Cleveland, Ohio. Now that’s in third place. London is second. I’d also read that, around 1910, Budapest and Warsaw had the most Jewish residents in Europe, and in 1920, New York had the most in the world. This was well before the foundation of the state of Israel, of course.

At the other end of Dohany street was 16–18, an imposing, bright yellow building, large and protruding and bold. Wide-mouthed gargoyles were either spitting or scowling from above. Grand columns sported leafy, lumpy garlands. Who knows if it was anything like that when Sarolta’s brother Miksa and family lived here? A young Margit Spitzer, our Zsa Zsa, lived here until she embarked on the first of her three marriages.

There were three main synagogues in this area. The denominations here were Orthodox, Conservative, and something they call Neolog – which is not quite like European Reformed but is looking in that direction more than the first two groups.

The Great Synagogue (Neolog) is the largest functioning synagogue in Europe and, in my opinion, deserves its reputation as the most beautiful. It is covered in mosaics and carvings and lovely detail, the golden and red stone and brick colours perfectly blended, and the entire effect is gorgeous, but dignified yet warm. In terms of actual warmth, however, the place was too massive to heat in winter, so it began moving to a smaller temple in the cold months, coming back in April – for Passover, I suppose.

Inside, it is spectacularly beautiful too. Oddly, it has some features that are Christian-looking, such as a pipe organ. The cantor does not stand in the middle as usual, but in the front, and there are two pulpits – when I was expecting no pulpits at all. It mixed styles freely.

There are four rows of long benches or pews, where men take the middle and front areas, leaving women the sides and the back. More conservative synagogues seat women upstairs only. On high holidays, here they can mix, but people often stick to old patterns. Kata attended once, and noticed women at the back happily gossiping. It looked friendly and fun.

I noticed a commemorative plaque that read: “Here was the house where Theodor Herzl was born.” This was the Austro-Hungarian journalist, playwright, political activist and writer who promoted the idea of immigration to Palestine to form a Jewish state. Although he died before that happened, he is known as the father of the state of Israel.

We turned onto Wesselenyi street, past all the crowds waiting for their tours. The synagogue was part of a much larger complex than I realised. First, we passed a large courtyard where huge dead trees supported a wealth of living vines, and the ground was covered with small headstones – a dozen or so around each tree trunk. We reached the “Garden of the Just” in which was a 1989 sculpture of a metallic silver weeping willow tree that had the names of Holocaust victims inscribed on each leaf. There was also an area with the names of those non-Jews who tried to save Jews under persecution. I have never been faced with a choice like that. I am aware that one never knows what one would do under such pressure, in the heat of the moment, but I want to believe I’d discover more courage than I knew. I am also afraid of my track record as a coward. We discussed this theme all the way through the Jewish Museum.

To one side was a plaque commemorating the life of Raoul Wallenberg, for whom this park was named. Wallenberg was a Swedish diplomat in Hungary during the Second World War. He and his embassy team used a variety of bold, imaginative means to rescue over 100,000 victims of Nazism within a six-month period. This included purchasing many properties to use as safehouses under fake names such as Swedish Red Cross, Swedish Kindergarten, Consulate Annex and so on, and providing thousands of fake passports – not useable as real passports for travel, but crucial as identity papers. He is possibly the bravest saviour and hero I have ever read about, and also the most betrayed and martyred as well.

Finally, we reached the door to the Archives and its Family Research Centre which I’d get to know better in the coming weeks.

After leaving, we took a detour up Rumbach street. Great-Aunt Roza was born at number 5, which looks like it was refurbished in its former elegant style, with the exception of the bilious, nauseating green colour of the ground floor that now housed a cheap corner grocery.

Soon we were presented with two massive murals. One was a pointillist interpretation of the Rubik Cube. The quote read, “There is always a solution and not just one.” As with life, so with puzzle cubes. The other mural was more cryptic, to me at least, because it was to do with football (soccer). I do not scorn sports, but I must admit to a thorough ignorance. Here, I could see something dramatic and epic had been depicted from 1953, and that the ratio 6:3 was significant. Karesz had to explain this was a historic victory of Hungary over England. I was just glad to hear of a bloodless victory. I am all for sports, in that sense. He was genuinely surprised I had never heard of the name Ferenc Puskas. There will be more about him later.



The Rumbach street synagogue was boarded up and looking in dire need of renovation. There is always something sad about such a sight – where the original was obviously splendid, and massive amounts of tender loving care are called for. Besides more lovely gold brick against terracotta tiles, there were also occasional winks of sky blue. Elaborate arches were stacked upon more arches, and, because the structure was so close to the street, you could not help but crane your neck heavenwards to take it all in.

The Orthodox synagogue was on Kazinczy street, slightly set back from the road, and I realised I’d been by it before without knowing what it was. It’s a subtler construction, mostly in a soft pinkish brick with a delicate palette of pastels and dusty grey-greens, and generally less ornamental bling than its neighbours. It was simple and elegant, with touches of Art Deco about the lines and the stained-glass windows.

Now we were full of imagery and information – and, in my case, mildly aching feet – so we headed to the kosher bakery on Dob street. Along the way, on the corner of Dob and Kazinczy, we passed the former home of Sandor Gomori, upholsterer and first husband of Frida Kardos. This was where he lived before they got married and moved in with her parents. Nowadays it’s brand spanking new, with a chic bistro, a tourist information centre and a chemist.

We had coffee and beautiful cakes in that sweet little bakery on Dob street, with the sweet little old couple serving. This may have been the historic moment I was introduced to a flodni cake (walnut, apple, poppy seed, plum jam). Who knew then, how many more of these would be in my future?

Over coffee and fabulous cakes, I asked about an old slang expression, “a little Kardos” (Kardos means swordsman) It also meant a sharp-tongued person, or a disobedient bride, or a woman who doesn’t do what men say, maybe even You Bitch, in the extreme. I learned this from Dr Nagy, a Hungarian professor of music and my former mentor. He was probably born around 1900, so this may have been old news.

No one had any idea what I meant, but they did agree that a ‘kard’ is a sword, therefore a ‘Kardos’ is a swordsman. ‘Kardcsortetes’ means ‘sabre-rattling’, and ‘kardoskodik’ was translated as ‘argumentative’ or ‘insistent’. That’ll do for me.

In Budapest, one is constantly presented with lovely things against the backdrop of an ugly past. If they could be here now, Frida and Elemer and the others, I imagine they’d just want to live, work, be with family and friends, have a treat now and again like a nice slice of cake – plain survival and a small patch of peace. I don’t know if it’s appropriate to quietly toast someone’s memory with coffee and cake. I think you can, if it’s from the heart.





CHAPTER XIII Family Gossip Tour of the VI and V



Week Two involved even more grid-walking, up and down long avenues, back and forth until I had to sit down. Then I either ate or overate – and repeated the process. I’d met most of the VII this way. Now I worked the VI, using the same technique. In my pocket at all times was the newly combined Address List and Food List, integrated and cross-referenced by district.

Overall, the Kardos–Spitzer Address List ranged from about 1850 to 1950. I located nearly every single place, photographed everything I could, published regular blogs about it, and got a ton of exercise. That was useful while I merrily ate twice the usual amount.

At first, my culinary intentions were to try everything once. Phase 2 would be deciding where I’d like to become a regular – this was while I hunted down sites of family milestones. I walked for several hours every late afternoon or evening, sneaking inside courtyards when people returned from work.

Budapest’s VI district is known for its Opera House, theatres, Franz Liszt Academy of Music, pretty side streets, cute bistros and bars, Andrassy street’s restaurants and chic shops, and the House of Terror – a tourist attraction about totalitarianism, mostly of the Communist sort.

That’s all very well and good, the official version, but this week I was on more of a personal gossip tour.





Izabella street


Izabella 70 was where Great-Aunt Berta lived with her husband Jozsef Peto. It’s where she had her two daughters, Jolan and Lili, and it’s where she died age twenty-three, in 1898, just two weeks after giving birth to Lili. Nowadays it’s the kind of official building that bears a national flag, big gates, and no other labelling except that cars are not allowed. Some buildings don’t tell you very much, and that story stopped cold.

Down the same street, however, was another story.

Number 85 was Aranka Hollander’s old place, before she married Rudy Kardos in 1912. This was fourteen years after his sister Berta died. His kid brother Eugene was long gone and settled in New York, or so they hoped. After a spring wedding, Aranka moved into Rudy’s place at Damjanich street 12, although he kept 25A as an office too. This was true until at least 1935, when Sarolta died and Rudy, upon reporting it, stated his address had not changed.

I infiltrated the courtyard. It was easy: the big heavy doors were wide open. There was a lot of building work going on. They were not changing the traditional grand old style, but reconstructing quite faithfully, as far as I could see. I photographed what I could, and wasn’t about to knock on doors because that would just be silly. Who would remember My People here in the early 1900s? If I were looking for anyone within living memory, I might be bolder.

As I was leaving, I bumped into an older couple taking out their rubbish. We had a funny little conversation – well, it was almost a conversation. It’s proof of what one can do with a combined total of maybe twenty words of a foreign language.

Nice Man and Shy Wife addressed me in pleasant words that I could not understand. I attempted to answer.

“Ah, Magyarul [Hungarian language] – no. English?”

“No. Mm, little.” He waved his hand around, as if to ask: Where are you going? Who are you looking for? I didn’t know how to say, it’s the former house of the wife of my great-uncle who was my father’s father’s brother. So, I used the nearest thing I knew.

“Grandmother, grandfather.” I pointed to me, and the place.

They smiled warmly and led me over to the entry buzzer, which listed all the names of current residents.

“Nem, nem [no, no]… Grandfather here, 1912.” I traced the date on the wall with my finger. They got it. They seemed happy, but shrugged they could not help. He traced 1901 on the wall, gesturing to the place at large.

“This, build, make, 1901. Grandfather, come, new place. Almost new.”

I gestured all around too, beyond the scaffolding and building rubble everywhere. Behind all that, was gorgeousness. That was one of my twenty words.

“Szep [beautiful].”

He groaned and cringed. “Work, seven year, no finish. Seven year!”

I groaned and cringed in sympathy. We three shook our heads in unison at the global nature of building work that never ends. Then I asked, or rather mimed asking, if I could take their photo. He translated to her. She shuddered and covered her face, while he and I laughed. The phone-camera was put away and I thanked them very much, the one Hungarian phrase I was very good at. He did a slight bow. White-haired Hungarian men of a certain age will do that sometimes. Charming.

We left together. Then he did something I have done a hundred times. He forgot to put the rubbish bag in the bin, took it to the car, slapped his forehead and went back, while his wife laughed.





Sziv (Heart) street 54


In 1918, oldest sister Roza and family lived at this address. All her children were born here. In 1921, her mother Sarolta arranged for Rudy to have power of attorney to sell this place, should she decide to do so. I do not know whether they sold it. I was awaiting another session with the translator to learn more.

Roza and various family were there from 1918 until she died in 1945. I didn’t know which flat. Then the translator shocked me by saying they owned the entire building. I asked him to check, twice. He said there was no doubt. I was not expecting that.

The power of attorney document also spelled out that Sarolta inherited the Sziv place from her mother. This may actually be the first time I’ve ‘known’ someone who owned something so large. A fashion clothing company now occupies the ground floor. It’s all in fine condition, freshly painted in pale gold and very pretty in a blond sort of way.





Vorosmarty street 58


From 1898 when Berta died, until 1906 at least, Lipot and Sarolta were living in the VI, on Vorosmarty 58, a short walk away. When his older sister Berta died, Eugene was fourteen years old, probably living there too. Rudy was nineteen, maybe living there or maybe not. Markus was twenty, studying engineering in Germany. The four sisters were all married.

Lipot and Sarolta owned this building too. This would be my first shock when I visited the City Archives later. Indexes indicate they did property deals in those years from that address.

It’s badly pockmarked today. It looks like it’s been machine-gunned. It may have been – in 1945, in 1956, any number of times. All the pretty ornamentation had crumbled. The ground floor had ugly, rusted bars on the windows, a few windows were cracked, and someone kept cold air out with vile-looking rags.

All that used to be ours.

There were a few miscellaneous places of note, too. Eotvos street was where Elemer Szente, Frida’s second husband, lived. The façade was outrageously over-decorated: carved faces of angry men alternated with cherubic babies, alongside every sort of curl, scroll and garland. Hermes and Athena were in there somewhere. Across the top danced statues of nearly naked women in varying poses of frolicking.

When I made the Address List, at first I didn’t remember dates. I imagined this was where he lived before he married Frida, and maybe this indicated he had money and was a good catch. After I checked the dates, I saw that he lived here in 1915, and she was living somewhere else, so maybe their 1904 marriage was not exactly made in heaven. They did not grow old together as I’d hoped.

Right next door, at the plain and staid number 55, lived Laszlo Gomori, the journalist son of Frida and her first husband. Laszlo was living here when he was married to Adel Bek.

On Rottenbiller street, Laszlo’s half-sister Angyalka lived with her painter husband, and they were both near the top of the Unaccounted For List.





Posh district V with a bit of comedy


Lipot korut (Leopold Boulevard) was eluding me. It was an important address as the family was there for a long time and it was our main connection to the glorious district V. It was not to be found. Perhaps it had been renamed.

The V is The District – if you are a snob, a tourist, or wealthy or well connected. Here you will find the magnificent Parliament building, huge statues of huge men on huge horses, the grand edifices of government ministry buildings, a great concert hall, a domed basilica, museums, expensive shopping, expensive restaurants, expensive hotels, and a wonderful promenade next to the Danube, including the artwork “Shoes on the Danube”: a touching memorial “To the memory of the victims shot into the Danube by Arrow Cross militiamen in 1944–45”.

They were not all shot. The Fascists’ favourite method was to tie three people together at the wrists, and then shoot the middle one, letting the other two drown. It’s possible this fact was not known to the tourists posing and smiling, laughingly putting their feet into the bronze shoes of the dead. If they did know, then I am confused.

Back to district V: Lipot and Sarolta lived on Kalman street from 1907 to 1908. Today this building is beautifully rendered brick with ivory paintwork, central enough to everything over which the materialistic drool. Then between 1910 and 1911, they were on Bathory street, along with son Markus – also an enviable address. At least, that’s what a few mysterious document indexes said. However, other documents had them living over in the VI, on Vorosmarty, so a property development dynasty was in the making. Live here, buy and sell there, perhaps.

As for Lipot korut 15, GGM Sarolta lived there all through her widowhood from 1912 until her death in 1935. With all respect to the deceased, it’s refreshingly honest and straightforward when the cause of death is listed simply as old age. She was in her mid-eighties.

During the First World War, her daughter Lujza stayed with her – presumably while her husband was away at war – as did Frida, who may or may not have left her second husband. Markus lived there from 1915 to 1918, from age thirty-seven to forty.

Granddaughter Jolan was there for quite a while; after all, she lost her mother Berta when she was only a toddler. Oddly, Jolan’s only other sibling, Lili, never moved there to my knowledge. In 1923 Jolan was given a gift that was indexed on a list of officially notarised documents. I’d put in a request to the archives to see exactly what kind of gift this was. I was unashamedly nosy about this.

There were many documents in either German or Hungarian awaiting translation. Great-Granddad Lipot’s will was in both. The Hungarian part was boring, all about how obsessively they sealed it with wax and ribbons to show later if it had been tampered with. When it was finally opened, they were equally obsessive to say it had not been tampered with. The German part, it would seem, was the good stuff, like who got what. That had to wait until I had procured a German translator.

During the First World War and after, widow Sarolta had loads of nieces and nephews and grandkids, so it’s easy to imagine swarms of them routinely visiting her at Lipot korut 15, where she lived for twenty-four years. After she died in 1935, the clan was still in the neighbourhood. Right next door, at number 13, lived Oszkar Szende, her brother Miksa’s son. Most of Sarolta’s many siblings were long dead, but Uncle Miksa was around and still productive, with four daughters and son Oszkar, who was only nine when his big cousin Eugene left for America.

Oszkar died at this address in 1944, age forty-seven, of a heart attack. He’d been divorced a few years earlier from wife Julianna. Twelve years earlier, he was either considerate or paranoid enough to convert to Christianity for her. We’ll never know. But our people concocted a lot of marriages where they changed religion right beforehand, and divorced a predictable seven to ten years later.

So, a lot happened on Lipot korut to these descendants of Lipot Kardos, which is why I was so keen to locate the road. Several locals told me it was an old name for an old thoroughfare. Finally, I learned it was now called Szent Istvan korut (St Stephen Boulevard). It was easy to find. It was huge, one of the Grand Boulevards of the city. Number 15 was therefore suitably grand, and directly across from another grand edifice, a distinguished, intimidating theatre that surely staged sombre classics or opera.

Wrong. This was the Vigszinhaz, or Comedy Theatre. However, it was no burlesque house or anything cheap – far from it. It puts on comedies by Shakespeare, Molière and Bertolt Brecht, as well as Woody Allen and many contemporary Hungarian playwrights.

How appropriate to be near a comedy theatre when I reflect that, during this whole trip, there’s been a certain joke on me. I have been stunned by the cool, lovely, even swanky places our people used to inhabit. Most immigrants passing through Ellis Island in the early twentieth century came from poverty and went to the USA to improve their lot. I think, on average, we have taken exactly the opposite trajectory. For example, I now live in a one-room hut, pulling down our bourgeois average quite badly. As a punchline for what I thought was my first walk into this part of town, I realised that this building looked familiar. I had indeed wandered past here before. In fact, it was the site of a joke – not a good one, but technically a joke. A groaner. This week’s Mish-Mash Cross-Cultural Reference Award goes to the “BBC, Budapest Barbecue Company, American Bar and Restaurant, License to Grill,” at Szent Istvan korut 13.

Modern life must march on. Great-Aunt Frida’s house, on the corner of Kazinczy and Kiraly – where she died hideously in the prison known as the Budapest Ghetto – was now upstairs from the Goa Mama Coffee Bar and the Rumpus Room Tiki Bar.



By the end of Week Two, I had encountered most streets, ogled many eateries and met many new characters both living and in memory. I, too, was laying down little roots of familiarity and comfort here. All levels of this project, past and present, kept growing and growing.





CHAPTER XIV Revolution Day, Set to Music



My grid-walking regularly produced happy accidents. The latest was on Dob street, where I’d read that Great-Uncle Miksa, Sarolta’s brother, once lived. It was on the list. It could feel suspenseful, walking towards any address on the list, counting down the house numbers, wondering if it was there at all. 16, 14, 12… ah well, 10 was gone. There was now a modern brick structure, set back from the road, with a sort of small plaza with benches. In the corner was a sculpture, an angel on high, reaching down to a struggling figure on the ground.

The plaques around here were usually in Hungarian, English and Hebrew. This one said: “Whoever saves a life is considered as if he has saved an entire world. (Talmud)”. Underneath that was written: “In memory of those who in 1944 under the leadership of the Swiss Consul Carl Lutz (1895–1975) rescued thousands from National Socialist Persecution”.

There were murals all over this city. Most of them were simply artworks and had no words or explanation. However, the one I discovered today was an exception. It was signed at the bottom, #WallsForFreedom, @Okudart, and it had a formal metallic plaque that read:

Angel Sanz Briz (1910–1980). The Spanish diplomat who, together with his collaborators at the Spanish Embassy in Budapest, saved the lives of over 5,000 Hungarian Jews by offering them shelter at protected apartments rented by the Embassy of Spain and issuing to them Spanish papers preventing their deportation to the death camps in 1944. His humanitarian role was recognised by the Jerusalem Yad Vashem Institute which granted him the title of “Righteous Among the Nations” 50 years ago. The above painting has been made by the Spanish artist Okuda San Miguel, as an initiative of the Embassy of Spain, in the framework of the programme “Mural Paintings for Freedom” and in cooperation with the Erzsebetvaros City Hall. Budapest, 13 October 2016.

Also scattered all over the city were “Stumble Stones”, hundreds of tiny brass plaques set into the pavement that you must bow to read; for example, “Laszlo Schmidt, born in 1907, lived here. Sent into forced labour. Blohinonal. In 1942, September, killed with 23 other people.” Some people don’t like that you step on them, others complain for other reasons, but many read them and bow with respect. I think it’s a commemoration, and the bowing is fitting and humbling.



Meanwhile, there were revolutions to commemorate: 15 March is Revolution Day in Hungary, a major national holiday. I now had a good local adviser, Kata, to clue me in. “All museums are free, so let’s go to the most expensive one.” We decided on the Budapest History Museum.

With apologies to my former history teacher Dave Goudy, let me declare that it’s in no way his fault that I can only take history in chunks of one hundred words or fewer. Maybe that’s not a bad exercise anyway. So here is the tiniest summary possible of why everything’s shut today except the restaurants. It’s based on very little reading, which I did late at night, and here’s all I remember in the morning (and yes, that’s how I did history exams, too):

Revolution Day’s theme is Democracy and Freedom. The 1848 Revolution was known for being relatively bloodless at first, but not for long. It’s one of the few revolutions sparked by a poem. Sandor Petofi, a popular romantic poet, stood at the top of some famous stairs, in romantically heavy rain, and cried out in verse that they would no longer be slaves. They threw off the yoke of the enslaving Austrian-Something Empire (Habsburg? Half a point, Dave?). The road to today’s democracy has been hideously bloody, and isn’t over, but today we celebrate the ideals of Democracy and Freedom.

Quite apart from that, how do living Hungarians celebrate Revolution Day? Beer and street parties, mainly.

In general, there’s the usual formal speeches, a massive procession that anyone can join, absolutely always a public re-reading of that famous inspiring poem from those famous steps, loads of family activities and, of course, there’s beer, street parties, and overeating. Many people wear red, white and green, or a tri-colour ribbon, or they arrange their vegetable stands accordingly.

I was ready to try my first Hungarian Revolution Day, but before that, I had to get my first transport ticket. Until now I’d walked everywhere. Today’s revolutionary plan involved actually crossing the Danube and going off my map. Why is it such a psychological leap, to cross a huge river? It’s true of London, New York, all the greats.

I had to learn public transport, and thus deepen my relationship with Bud, as I now mentally referred to Budapest, my new buddy. It’s always nice to step up a notch above most tourists, and buy a one-month travel pass. This took me a couple of tries. First, at the automated machine I was immediately surrounded by a team of aggressive beggars, six young guys all bigger than me. I exited quickly.

The next machine confused me, saying it was only for “natural persons”. Only for Hungarian nationals? I decided to try to fake it. It asked for ID. I abandoned ship. Then, as they say, third time lucky. I consulted the nice apart-hotel staff who assured me the “natural” mistranslation was a well-known joke around there. All EU people were acceptable – even the British, for the time being. And no, one did not have to scan one’s ID, but provide a number. So, I gave them my passport number, got my pass, and today I took my first tram. Now that I’d gone and bought a ticket, I bet myself I’d ride these trains every day and never get asked to show my ticket. (That would turn out to be true.)

On my first tram, I was ready to cross the river. We went to district I, up to the Buda Castle area. Along the way, there was a surprise detour. It reminded me of one of the best mottoes I ever coined: “Shake and shake your apple tree, so a mile away, oranges fall down.” What I mean is that sincere, steady effort will produce results, just not the ones you’re expecting. Yesterday’s oranges were delicious.

On our way to the Budapest History Museum, by sheer accident, we walked past the Museum of Music History, something I could not pass by.

There’s plenty I do not remember about my trip here forty years ago, but music was certainly one of my most vivid memories. Not only did I go to folk dancing clubs with some of the best fiddlers on earth, but just about every day I went to the elegant Liszt Academy where superb classical concerts were available for less than a dollar. Sometimes I went twice a day. It was heavenly.

For a relatively small country, Hungary has cranked out lots of wonderful musicians. I had a rare chance to study with one of them when I wasn’t even twenty years old, just before that first trip here. By sheer, orange-filled accident, I met a distinguished professor of classical piano named Bela Boszormenyi-Nagy. Obviously, no one could pronounce that, so he shortened it to Dr Nagy – pronounced more like Naj or Nadge, but we never got it right. Dr Nagy changed my career path in life, and I cannot thank him enough.

I hadn’t thought of him in years until this moment. The sight of this place zinged him out of my dusty memory banks and into the forefront of my mind. What a great musician, fine all-round mentor, and personable, witty guy he was – not just an artist, but a well-read, articulate intellectual too. Plus, he could be really silly. He was about seventy years old at the time.

In we went. Half the time I was absorbed by the exhibits, and half the time I was distracted by a flood of fond memories.

The first wall was covered, floor to ceiling, with photos. The last century’s best-known classical artists from Hungary were there, the big three. Bela Bartok was most famous for composition but was also a concert pianist. Ernst Dohnanyi was a concert pianist and conductor, and also a composer. Zoltan Kodaly, celebrated around the world as the creator of the Kodaly method of music education, was also a composer, mentor, linguist, philosopher and ethnomusicologist.

More oranges fell down.

The very first photo near the main entrance was none other than witty, good old Dr Nagy, having dinner with Bartok. I’d never have recognised him as a young man, but there he was, so labelled. At the time, he was a rising student star at the Liszt Academy. He knew Bartok and company as mentors.

I met Dr Nagy through another orange windfall. One summer, I travelled to Boston University to add music history credits and explore that city. At the time, I was at Oberlin majoring in English Literature with music as a secondary area. Dr Nagy changed all that. He was teaching a specialised course in twentieth-century classical piano music history. The first day, as he checked names, his eyebrows popped.

“Who is Kardos?”

I raised my hand.

“You are Hungarian!”

“My grandparents, yes. Me, no. I was born here.”

“But your family, your blood, is Hungarian?” This is their law, by the way. It’s about your blood, not where you’re born.

“Yes. Dad’s people were Hungarian.”

“Your instrument is piano?”

“Yes.”

“You will come to my studio today at 2pm, and you will study piano with me.”

Now I could not afford that. My study budget was tight and all accounted for. That was the furthest thing from his mind. At his insistence, I studied piano with him several sessions a week, all that summer, and he didn’t ask for a penny. I was way out of my depth and learned more than I can say.

I explained how music was not my major at college, but he just stared, not comprehending. One session, I scrambled through a sonata, unsure yet giving it my all. He did his usual thing, which was to move around the room, conduct, sing, dance, and otherwise accompany you. By the end, he was right up close, leaning on the piano and looking at me intensely.

“Music is not your major? That’s absurd. You’ve got the right temperament. Go back there and make it your major. OK, I know you love literature too. So? Do both.”

This was delivered in a “That’s settled” tone. His idea stuck. Why choose? Do both.

Up until then, I did not have enough faith in myself, but he was that kind of mentor. He zoomed in on the unsure, and filled them with certainty. I did what he said. It was a very good decision. I never reached the calibre of a concert player, but as a teacher, I too zoomed in on the unsure and filled them with certainty, got them on stage and they felt happy there. This was endlessly beautiful.

Dr Nagy died back in 1990. There were plenty of tributes. One quote leapt out at me, from ex-pupil ZsuZsa Szabo: “When we sat down at the piano, and he sensed talent in someone, he practically swept that person into the music: he whistled, conducted, played, he made us fly. What we received in these classes, we received for a lifetime.”

I couldn’t agree more.

Eventually we got to the Budapest History Museum. It was massive, beautiful, informative and overwhelming. We spent hours there, and only left when we had to. I may have to go back. It was a long, fine day full of high-quality oranges amid our apple-picking tour.



This Ides of March marked exactly halfway through my month. I started thinking I should book a flight back home, but I have always been wary of the concept of “should”. I do not totally trust that word. At the thought of leaving, I became surprisingly upset. I didn’t want to leave. So, that settled it. I didn’t leave. I stayed. I made it official, before I could chicken out, by immediately dashing downstairs to reception in what I now called a pyjama-run, to stay a second month.

Returning to my room by lift, there was triumphant arm-waving, and thankful grateful thoughts for wonderful Dr Nagy. Please allow me to close Revolution Day with a tribute to Dr Nagy, culling the best from the many tributes to him.

Bela Boszormenyi-Nagy was one of the most important Hungarian pianists after the generation of Bartok and Dohnanyi. He studied at Liszt Academy in Budapest, and taught there too. In 1948, he and his family moved to Canada. He taught at half a dozen major universities, and toured widely.

He gave the Budapest premiere of Bartok’s Third Piano Concerto, as well as European premieres of many contemporary compositions.

His unusually wide repertoire included sixty concertos, as well as almost all the solo works of Johann Sebastian Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Chopin, Brahms, Debussy, Ravel, Bartok, Kodaly, Stravinsky, Boulez and Stockhausen.

From the middle of the seventies, he made regular visits to Hungary: according to his friends, on such visits he always spent long hours in his alma mater, the Music Academy, walking the corridors and looking into the classrooms. He died in the USA, at the age of seventy-eight, in February 1990.

A toast: To people who surprise you. To turning your life around. To apples and oranges.





CHAPTER XV Olga’s Three Husbands



This week heralded my first visit to the maze housing the Family Research Centre and its many neighbours. I was glad to be accompanied as otherwise I would not have known where to start or what to ask. This was a kindness on the part of Karesz, who knew I wanted to check a certain rare reference book, and had many questions about items on my Unaccounted For List. He was going there anyway on other business, and said I could join him.

We went through security up the stairs and in the first door. I was introduced to Szandra, who soon set me up in their other room at a long book-cluttered table (my kind of place), at the end of which was a lady mostly hidden behind a computer, occasionally leaning into view to smile and offer me snacks (terrible looking, crumbs everywhere, my kind of place). She was engaged in climbing a huge data-entry mountain and junk-snacks were her fuel.

I sat down with the heavy tome known as The Counted Remnant Book of Budapest, 1946, one of the precious few remaining. This was a list of all Jewish Budapesters who managed to survive the Holocaust, came home, and wanted to be found. Their last known whereabouts were listed in here. A lot of people found each other via this book. It looked very, very worn.

It was battered, massive, dignified in design, and falling apart through sheer use by so many. I started carefully leafing through the tissue-fine pages, squinting at the small print, and, time after time, not finding any of the names I was hoping to find.

The Unaccounted For List had dozens of names on it, but I found none. I sat and absorbed that. It could mean many things: Maybe they died in the war. Maybe they left Hungary forever. Maybe they moved to some other area of Hungary. Maybe they changed their names. Maybe they were afraid to publish their address. Maybe all kinds of things could have happened. Whatever the reason, they were not here.

This took most of my morning. I sat and wondered about my next move. This sort of research is less painful and frustrating if you simply accept the odds. There are days you search all day and find nothing, except the areas to not bother with – ever again. It’s not exactly like a path or a journey. It’s more like drawing a map from scratch for every step you take. You must go down hundreds of roads – in fact, all of them. That’s how it can feel. You have to draw the map as you go, and a new one each morning.

My favourite cartoon from childhood starred the dog-genius Mr Peabody – and why isn’t he called Dr Peabody, by the way? If he’s not a doctor, who is? Anyway, the point is he instructed his boy Sherman that the way to find a needle in a haystack was to sit in the haystack. Sherman jumped in, shrieked and pulled the needle out of his behind, in full support of this theory. If only there were an equivalent with other things in life, like information. It’d be worth a pang now and again.

Just then, archivist Szandra came in and asked if I had people to research born after 1895. Yes, sure I did. I had over twenty. I’d lost count.

She was going over to that department, so if I had birth or marriage records to search out, now was my chance. I grabbed my notebook with my seven-page master list. She stared. She asked if I could bring just one piece of paper, because this particular archivist was, well, how could she put this? The lady concerned was sometimes moody or fussy, even grumpy at times, and also panicky when faced with a long list. I tucked my papers inside and made it look like just one page on top.

Two of Szandra’s colleagues warned me this lady could be gruff, and it was nothing to do with me. I was not to worry, they reiterated. They asked each other what sort of gift Szandra should bring, and agreed on a handful of candy. They wished me luck so vigorously they made me nervous.

“Maybe I should come back another day, when I am better organised?” I suggested.

“There is never a better day. Come now. I will take care of you,” Szandra replied.

She led me through a maze of corridors into an office where three large older women glared at us like we’d interrupted them in a clothing shop’s changing room, pulling open the curtain when their bras were only half adjusted. Big, missile-sized, weaponry-shaped bras.

We got lucky. Mrs Grumpy was not in such a terrible mood. There was some tutting and frowning at my dishevelled list, but tolerable levels. I reddened and stuttered because I hate wasting people’s time when I am new and incompetent. But, although her manner of questioning rattled me, she did every search we asked for. Her English was limited but Szandra’s was perfect, and she guided the whole process.

Mostly, nothing.

Not everything is digitised, especially for people born more than fifty years ago. Plus, the further back you go, the less people bothered registering anything. Records get lost. Records get destroyed, even set alight by invading armies. Mrs Grumpy went to a massive wooden cabinet, heaved open the heavy doors, and pulled down the appropriate ancient brown tome in which every birth of the city was hand-scratched in spidery script in chronological order. Nothing was cross-referenced or indexed. You had to know the exact day. That’s why this information can be hard to find.

She scowled and went back to her computer.

The very moment you are about to give up, the last name on the list will suddenly cooperate with you.

Olga, in this case. Cousin Olga Neufeld. She’s the latest orange that fell off the apple tree.

Here’s where Olga perched: of Granddad Eugene’s six siblings, the second oldest was Lujza. Lujza married Jakab Neufeld in the early 1890s, and he seemed to have disappeared during the First World War. They had two children: Olga, and a boy Karoly, who remained a mystery.

Olga was a direct blood cousin – my dad’s cousin. This was startlingly close.

Mrs Grumpy typed in Olga’s name and birth year, and quite a few names came up. She scrolled through, calling the various parents’ names – until we had a hit! I squealed, clapping my hands like a kid opening a birthday present – which, in fact, is exactly what it was.

I reflected on having worked in giftware. I have given a lot of thought to the rituals of gift-giving, and to the psychology behind it. For example, Dad never wanted gifts, which was a struggle every birthday. Mom would suggest new slippers, as he padded around in a pair as thin as a cracker. He’d protest he’d just fit cardboard inside and they could go another year. He was a child of the Great Depression and never lost those frugal habits.

However, he did play golf. On birthdays he accepted golf tees, although he had thousands in a sack in the garage, scavenged off the public course. It was the same with golf balls, in a second sack. Golf shirts piled up in the closet. The solution was chocolate-covered cherries. He took one, passed them around, and was soon relieved of another unwanted thing.

Giving the right gift to the right person at the right moment, and getting that smile when they see it – this is an artform.

A gift came my way, in this way, on this day. Olga passed me the box, and a nice fat little fact was in there for me, a delectable morsel. Olga did indeed get married. In fact, she then got remarried.

Mrs Grumpy actually smiled, and it was a true and warm smile. “She was married. Here is husband number two!” She read on, and then she really smiled – the smile of amusement.

“Ooo! She liked doctors!”

That woke me up. “Both husbands were doctors?”

Not exactly. This second husband was a medical doctor. At his wedding, both witnesses were doctors too. Three doctors on one page. This brightened Mrs Grumpy’s day, for some reason. It truly brightened mine – I had a lead! I was expecting, stupidly, Mrs G would automatically give me a print-out, but she handed me a piece of paper while she and Szandra painstakingly spelled out all the lengthy Hungarian names, like those of the couple’s parents, and the witnesses, and where they were all from.

The couple were married on 20 September 1931, age thirty-six and thirty-seven. The groom, Dr Jeno Barsony, Jewish, was born in 1894 in Miskolc, a city in the northeast. He was then living in the posh district V and both his parents were still living. Olga was described as Jewish, and divorced, living in the VIII. (Aha! So her first husband didn’t die; they were divorced.) Her father was listed as being alive at the time of the wedding, but not her mother Lujza. So, her dad did not die in the First World War, as I once thought, but made it to 1931 to see his daughter married. Again.

Meanwhile, at their computers, these archivists knew all too well that visitors always hope to find living relatives. They became serious again when telling me this marriage had no children. If they had, the added note would be here. They also reiterated there was no information about the first marriage. These were only records of this city, and these had gaps. The first marriage may have happened somewhere else. If there were kids, that’s where they’d be listed.

Olga was now second place in our Advantageous Marriage Stakes. Her cousin Margit Spitzer, on the maternal side of the tree, was still in first place with three husbands – including a factory owner and an army general, plus a still mysterious number two. She was still our Zsa Zsa Gabor, but Olga was now our Eva. Just for the record, Zsa Zsa had nine husbands, Eva had five.

On that same day, at a dangerously wonderful English language bookshop in the city centre, Bestsellers, I saw an 800-page book entitled Those Glamorous Gabors: Bombshells from Budapest – Great Courtesans of the 20th Century. “Courtesans”? I thought courtesans and five-star prostitutes never married anyone but just took the cash and gifts directly, without legal complication. Maybe that’s splitting hairs. It won Best Biography 2013 at the Hollywood Book Festival. The blurb said the Gabors “would collectively entrap some 20 husbands and seduce perhaps 500 other men as well, many plucked directly from the pages of Who’s Who in the World”.

So, that’s two massive tomes I handled in one day, about as opposite as tomes can be. Those who crawled out of the rubble in 1945 survived however they could. The Gabor sisters, those nice Jewish girls, escaped Hungary at just the right time and survived beyond most of our imaginations.

Not everyone was so lucky.

Or cunning.

Or cute in a low-cut dress.

Research continued.





CHAPTER XVI Freedom Square is Controversy Square



Yesterday was a winner. I met Marianna, and the day was a welcome delight. By the time we got together, we both forgot how we connected. It was suitably irrelevant: her husband’s daughter from a previous marriage went to my university (much later than I did), although we’d never met. But she saw my appeal on the university’s website to find English speakers in Budapest. She shared it with her stepmother Marianna, who kindly answered, in perfect English, and we met at a café.

Mari once did a thorough genealogy search on her own family and made a short video which she took to schools, contributing to history classes. She didn’t use the word Holocaust, just told her family’s history, which in part ended in the Second World War. Hers was a mixed-religion family too.

The project sounded thrilling to me, but she was modest and self-effacing. She said usually the kids were bored by the idea of any history lesson at first; however, with personal details and specifics, by the end, they were always absorbed wholeheartedly by the story.

My notes said our lunch was full of exchanging such stories, but mainly she was asking about my research. Afterwards, we were walking in the same direction, so she gave me an impromptu history lesson and city tour. I wish I’d taped it. It was that good. She was born and bred here, knew and loved her city well, and loved telling people about it.

We walked through “Freedom Square” or Liberty Square, so named to celebrate the removal of a palace representing centuries of unwanted rule by the Habsburg Empire, on the site of which this square was created instead. We entered from the corner where a grand, golden, classical structure commanded attention. It was the former Stock Exchange, she said. This seized my stomach. GGF Lipot would have worked here at some point, surely. He would have gone in and out those doors. It housed the national television station from the 1950s to 2010, but now it stood empty, waiting for an investor. I was transfixed while Mari tugged my elbow to our first feature on the right.

It was a church, with wrought-iron bars and a bullet-proof glass cabinet housing a bust of an extremely controversial figure, Miklos Horthy, long-time Regent of Hungary from after the First World War through most of the next. His detractors call him a vile betrayer, and the whole reason the Nazis did what they did. Others say he was a weak, naïve man who was out-manoeuvred. He eventually halted deportations to death camps, but only at the last moment when it was too late. Certainly, every time his name came up, Hungarians threw their heads back in a deep sigh, not knowing where to start.

When this statue was installed, there was protest. At first, it stood outside the church in the public square, but there were attempts at vandalism. Then the church built the iron gate and placed it inside, safe on their own territory. But vandalism continued, so bullet-proof glass was introduced.

Our next controversy was the memorial to victims of Nazi Germany. How could that be controversial? It portrayed the evil eagle of Germany crushing the poor helpless and writhing Hungarian nation down low. This symbolism continues to be hotly disputed. Record low numbers of Nazi troops were sent into Hungary because there were record high numbers of local pro-Germany extreme right wingers, more than eager to collaborate. In that sense, Hungarians turned on each other. The enemies were not all outsiders. Most were within.

The fence in front of the memorial was covered with mementoes from protesters, like photos, old suitcases, abandoned shoes, petitions. There is an organisation today actively asking for this memorial to be changed. They want local collaborators acknowledged.

Next controversy:

A tower loomed with a hammer and sickle and Russian writing. It was next to a thick row of tall trees between there and the US Embassy nearby. It goes by many names. Officially it’s “The Memorial to Soviet Liberation of Hungary in World War II from Nazi German Occupation”. The word “liberation” has been questioned by those who call it raping and conquering. The phrase “liberation of Budapest” is one I saw time and time again, with no alternatives. I too used this phrase, before I learned more. Invading Red Army soldiers inflicted an estimated 200,000 assaults on women, and it’s said that few females escaped unharmed. Overall, the Soviet Communists simply took over, not to liberate, but to impose another occupation.

The lamps that lit the tower at night had been vandalised often enough to be put behind cages.

We passed an unexpected statue of Ronald Reagan. We didn’t linger.

At the end of the square, the final memorial was a charming sculpture of a man in visionary pose, gazing up and across to nearby Parliament, standing atop a curved footbridge. It’s halfway between Parliament and Liberty Square, the symbolic spot where Imre Nagy led revolutionaries in 1956, halfway to freedom. He has been called a controversial hero; he was twice prime minister, but is generally thought of as a martyr for freedom. It was good to end on that note. (However, in 2018, this statue was removed.)

Mari showed a keen eye for the captivating features of Art Deco architecture in which Budapest is rich. Unexpectedly, while walking along Miksa Falk street, we strolled past a full-sized bronze statue of actor Peter Falk in his Columbo character. Next to him was Dog, with children happily climbing on him. Mari said that, back in the day, when Columbo appeared on Hungarian TV, the nation adored him. I looked into the actor’s connection to the street.

In a quote given to the Wall Street Journal by Antal Rogan, district mayor at the time, the actor may have been related to the nineteenth-century Hungarian political figure Miksa Falk, for whom the street is named, although he conceded it was yet to be proved. The 2014 statue was part of an urban rejuvenation project, three years after Falk’s passing but a few months before Rogan ran for re-election.

It was a strange controversy. Google yielded eight articles calling Falk’s Hungarian ancestry an urban myth. Many complained the statue cost over $60,000, and called it a pre-election stunt. Three locals I questioned thought Falk was indeed a relation of Miksa Falk, didn’t see the problem, and dismissed these questions. He was hugely popular here, and the programme was beloved. Dare I say, scratching my head, that we may have an unsolved mystery here?



And finally, at the height of the honeymoon phase of tourism, when one is in love with everything and wants to move there forever, however unrealistically, this was the gushing postcard I sent to the online Hungarian genealogy group, who had helped me get here.

If ever you get a chance to visit Hungary, may you enjoy it as much as I am doing, right now. It’s inevitable you will love it. I came here in 1977, and now again in 2017. There are all the archives with masses of documentation. There’s a lot of information and also solace in visiting cemeteries. I have been trotting around seeing and photographing all the different places where family lived, over the last 100 years.

There’s the food, obviously, meaning every food in the world.

There is astonishingly creative architecture, everywhere. There are all the history museums, and highly educated tour guides. There are huge art murals on the sides of many buildings. And, people have been helpful and warm and welcoming, even although I speak very little Hungarian – in fact, none at all.

Did I mention the food?

This trip was my 60th birthday present to myself, and I can say without doubt, it has been the trip of a lifetime. It’s not over, either. I have a few more weeks! Try to come, if you can.

At the end of that long, interesting day, I was hungry when I got home to the VII. I thought of a pretty place I kept wanting to try. It was not dead cheap, but today was the day for something a touch nicer than usual. The most unusual thing on Ghetto Goulash’s menu was “rooster testicle and cock’s comb stew with white peasant bread”. I didn’t try it. Maybe another time I’ll be more butch. Also, it’s just silly that what was once poor people’s stew is now served on white linen with a dry white wine.

I had a classic, simple chicken paprikash, and it was gorgeous.

No controversy.





CHAPTER XVII Happy 60th, Spring 2017



I’d been running around like a spring-loaded toy. It was time for a good look at what had been happening, now it was the end of March. It had been exactly four weeks since I’d arrived. It felt marvellous. There were all kinds of little sweeties lying around among the apples and oranges.

First, the minor things. There were countless places I could go without need of maps or street signs. Hawkers and tourist business people stopped selling at me. I walked with a purpose, and perhaps also didn’t look very moneyed. Pretending to look local was a fun new game.

When I went to the main supermarket, I no longer went up and down every aisle, checking everything. I knew where my favoured areas were, and took a streamlined route. I also knew the two other nearby supermarkets and divided my shopping: one had this, one had that. I had routines. It was like home.

I’d learned to move damned quickly at the checkout, where you windmilled all your checked items straight back into the basket and sprinted to the distant counter where you were allowed to pack at your leisure. No one broke this rule. The impatient hordes would never allow it.

I was slowly and devotedly checking things off my Food List, conquering and digesting most of it. I stopped eating everything I saw. I didn’t need something new every day. I was developing a few usual haunts. The hummus and falafel place, the Indian place, the vegan place, the goulash place. Any bakery with flodni cakes was the biggest draw, over and over again.

I became A Regular in places where I’d been more than three times, got the same thing, and they remembered. Then they’d be chatty and ask how long I was staying. When I said a month, eyebrows raised. I explained the ancestor search and they loved it, every single time.





The Food File, now and then


Recently I had been too busy stuffing my face to bother writing about it. My guts had the last word of course, and by the end of the month I was reining myself in. Still, there was a fine array of traditional, international, fusion and healthy cuisines.

The flodni cake survey: I preferred the classic matzo version, which had more texture and firmness – unlike its modern pastry counterpart – as served at (Koleves) Stone Soup Café, with a tart plum jam in abundance, apple slices instead of shredded apple, maybe a waft of lemon, and generally not too sweet. The Dob street place was most generous with walnuts. All interpretations were divine, but Rachel’s was closest to my digs, and I passed there every day. I didn’t even try to resist.

When I was here forty years ago, I recall eating four or five, even six meals each day. If I could smell it, I would find it and eat it: this was the policy. It was fun if crazily obsessive. I was a regular at a retesh/strudel shop, long and narrow, with twenty sweet types along one wall, and twenty savoury ones on the other. They were all fresh, and the smell was heady. I think I ate all of them – or at I least I tried.

The bakeries all did individually crafted hand-made ice creams, and the chestnut was the front runner, which was exquisite. There were loads of things made from chestnuts, such as mousse, creme, cakes and cookies. There were super-cheap cafeterias with excellent goulash ladled out of great cauldrons. Big baskets of homemade bread got passed from table to table, and it was very hard not to eat masses of it, this dark, substantial, no-messing-around, good-for-you and tasty bread, rough rye with plenty of caraway, nothing mass produced.

Oh, how I ate back then. Blissful days and nights. I could eat gallons of butter noodles, everything dripping in sour cream, everything fried in pork fat. I ate it all. Not now. But, in the month, I completed my Food List, which was of vital importance.



In terms of the main theme, a ton of information came to light, about the Kohn/Kardos and Spitzer clans. I’d created an Unaccounted For List. I had a huge and intriguing Questions file, which would not let go of me. I thought I’d find enough material for a few blog-type articles, but we were way past that now. There was plenty for a book. This book. I had to stay, didn’t I? There were too many stories. And so, it was an excellent birthday – my best ever.

Here’s the Birthday thanks message I sent out at the end of the month:

I did it. I turned sixty. Thanks for the birthday wishes. I started thanking you one by one, but ran out of steam. So, thanks extra for the touchingly big turnout, too. It wasn’t just turning sixty – it felt like a lifetime achievement award. I never assumed I’d survive to such an age, so gratitude is running high.

I went out to lunch, out to dinner, then out to a bar for the evening. The other day was a Klezmer band concert, and last night was a jazz bar.

Funnily enough, I never met any of the companions concerned, before this month. Most of them I met for the very first time, on the day. The array of local Budapesters who joined me included a friend of a total stranger who went to my college, people from an internet Hungarian genealogy group, people I accidentally met for five minutes in Thailand, a pub quiz group (that was fun!), other friendly strangers, a few teeter-tottery barflies of unknown degrees of separation, and a dog named Richard.

Well, I wanted something different than usual. You guys sure delivered! Here’s to friends, old and young, old and new. Again – cheers.

A word about the pub quiz, the high point of the month, so far as living people were concerned. Kata, my first friend here, joined me for an early dinner before the Operation Budapest Think and Drink English-Speakers Pub Quiz. There was an empty chair that night, which I filled. They were a friendly team, and damned smart. They knew each other via CEU (Central Europe University). They spoke at least fifteen languages between them, all to a high level. Kasia had a brain recording of every piece of music in the universe. Tanya was so quick, she was a blur. Claudio covered food, things Hispanic, and most arts. Christophe covered history, geography, everything else plus another seven more languages. Kata covered a variety of topics as well as fluent Hungarian. I covered miscellany and old stuff, especially from the 1960s.

We won second place. My team-mates were a bit miffed. They usually got first place. This team was used to winning. They were ambitious academics. It was like a thirty-something Big Bang Theory, this time in the social sciences. We were all bad at the sports questions. But we won a bottle of wine. I made my outright bid to be on their on-going list of substitutes, and received no argument. Later, I became a regular. I had a mini social life in the bud. Who knew?





CHAPTER XVIII Good Luck, Bad Luck Sisters



When this saga began, long before I arrived in Budapest, I discovered about a dozen family documents online. I’d soon be inundated with documents, but those first few felt precious. I found them on the Hungaricana.hu website, which had a short translated summary. As for the details, in German and/or Hungarian – or the really old ones in Latin – I’d have to wait.

In that first thrilling batch, one was labelled simply “Gift”. It was from our GGM Sarolta to someone named Jolan Peto. At the time, I was unsure who this was, whether male or female, whether pronounced Jolan or Yolan, whether grandchild or niece or what. Later, with translation, I learned Jolan was one of Sarolta’s granddaughters – her mother was Sarolta’s third daughter, Berta.

In this document of 1923, Lipot was already long dead. His widow Sarolta was bestowing a gift on grandchild Jolan. The document spelled out that the girl was raised by Sarolta from about age two. It said: “Considering the fact that my grandchild Jolan Peto was raised in my household, and helped me with my chores, helped me in every way while I was widowed (for over ten years), took care of me when I was sick – for all these reasons, I wish to return this kindness. I will help her with a marriage dowry. I give her the belongings in this apartment, everything that is listed here. This is effective immediately.”

An actual figure for the marriage dowry was not mentioned. Belongings were described in quite a long list, also without specific valuation. The flat consisted of dining room, living room, kitchen with maid’s room, sitting room/bedroom, study or library, and a “winter garden”, which sounded like a conservatory or glasshouse. The place contained a grand piano, grandfather clock, masses of furniture, Persian carpets, two chandeliers, linens and curtains and traditionally embroidered wonders, plus valuable Majolica ceramics and other goodies. Lucky Jolan.

A burning question remained: where was Jolan’s sister Lili? They were both in their middle twenties. Maybe Lili was married already? Maybe a similar document for her was missing? Maybe Lili got cash but Jolan got objects and property? Maybe Jolan got it all and Lili got nothing?

This was the start of The Legend of the Good Luck Bad Luck Sisters. They seemed to be living under some strange fairy tale curse. As each fact was revealed, it was either extremely lucky or extremely unlucky, with few middle paths. This theory developed for lack of answers. It began with Jolan appearing to have all advantages, but it really started with their mother, Berta. Her daughters Jolan and Lili, were born in 1896 and 1898. Berta’s records showed that she died in 1898. This gave me a shock that forced me to check and re-check the dates.

Berta died in 1898, when she was twenty-three, about two weeks after Lili was born. Her cause of death took time to decipher, but I discovered she died of oedema of the womb and lungs, as a result of that labour. This death certificate was dutifully signed by her newly widowed husband, Jozsef Peto.

She died at 8pm on 10 May. The next day, Joe (let’s shorten his name) went to report it. It’s awful how clearly he can be pictured trudging numbly to perform that task, in a daze, returning home to a toddler and a newborn, no wife for him and no mother for them. Thankfully, both daughters lived much longer than their mother did. Their marriage documents added some facts.

Younger sister Lili got married first, on 3 October 1926, aged twenty-eight. Her residence was in the small city of Szombathely (SOM-ba-tey), at the Hotel Kovacs. Szombathely is a city in Vas County, a few hours’ drive west of the capital and closer to the Austrian border. Her father was living in the same city but at a different address, which I found puzzling. Although his family was from around there, it was surprising he did not stay in Budapest where he worked and lived. I had no idea when Joe left Budapest, let alone why.

Lili’s husband Oszkar Weisz was a widower and an engineer, and twenty-five years older than Lili. Oszkar was not a Budapester, either by birth or by residence, at the time they got married. He was a resident of Szombathely too and had been born in Szekesfehervar, not far from there.

At their wedding, she was twenty-eight and he was fifty-three. I should not jump to conclusions, but “poor young Lili” was my first reaction. It wasn’t the first time I reacted that way. I saw so many old marriage documents with huge age gaps, it made me queasy. Also, it showed me my good luck that, in my era, I could work to support myself and have a choice over whether to marry or not.

The wedding’s witnesses were Ede Muller and Gyula Gluck, also from Szombathely, with no obvious family connections. Unusually, no other Budapesters or family were in evidence. Ten years later, Oszkar Weisz died age sixty-three, when Lili was thirty-eight. His death was reported by Gyorgy Weisz (brother or nephew?). On his death certificate, it named his profession as Engineer and Master Builder. He was also by then labelled a Roman Catholic, interesting for a man whose Jewish parents were Jakab Weisz and Alexandrina Stern, and whose wife was 100 per cent Jewish.

In general in this clan, there was an incredible amount of inter-marrying, converting, name-changing and switching around. We’ll never know which were sincere, or technical, or fearful.

Jolan married a year after Lili, while resident at Lipot korut 15 with her grandma Sarolta. I saw no records that Lili ever lived with her grandparents, or had anything to do with them, but Jolan was there until her wedding. She married Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz (LA-yos Ko-PETZ-I Botz). This surname does not sound Hungarian, but perhaps Slovakian. He was divorced, and his profession was given as Journalist. I was happy to see he was born in 1894, making him only two years older than Jolan. My wish for a soulmate connection was based on that alone, which of course was sentimental and flimsy.

The witnesses were Laszlo Weninger (no idea), and good old Uncle Rudy. He was a popular choice as wedding witness: his name appears on family marriage records more than any other. This inspired renaming him Good Old Uncle Rudy. The immediately older brother of Granddad Eugene, the banker who blazed the trail for him from Budapest to New York, led Eugene there, and promptly went straight back to Budapest. There was something traditional and dependable about him, I believed. I imagined the scene at his parents’ place:

“Go help Eugene set up in New York.”

“All right. Should take a few months.”

“OK, everybody, it’s settled. Rudy will take care of it.”

Lajos and Jolan were married on 24 December 1927. He was labelled a Calvinist, which I finally worked out is translated shorthand for Hungarian Reformed Church. Maybe getting married on Christmas Eve was good luck for a Calvinist and a nice Jewish girl with a grand piano and designer furnishings but possibly not much cash in the dowry.

The only other facts I could confirm were these: they were thirty-one and thirty-three when they married. The marriage was dissolved eight years later, on 5 September 1935. I should forget the soulmate thing. Clearly her good luck did not cover all categories. She got the piano but not the right guy. The Good Luck Bad Luck theory was fluttering, but not completely gone.

The sisters’ father Joe died in Szombathely of heart failure on 11 November 1926, aged sixty-five. On his death certificate, his profession was listed as Trade Dealer, which could mean anything. I suppose he left the “telegraphic business” back in Budapest – or whatever that was, written on his daughter Lili’s birth certificate. He seemed to go from job to job over his life. Someone named Denes Sandor reported his death, maybe a neighbour? I pictured Joe as a long-standing widow who never remarried. A guess.

More relevant and poignant is that Joe died a year before daughter Jolan got married. However, he did live to see Lili marry a month before he died. At least there was that, for this single father. A single dad back then, I felt, was a figure of deep pathos, a victim of profoundly unfair bad fortune. That scenario would change later.

The widowed Lili remarried. Her belated obituary named her as the wife of Dr Pal Windholtz. Her local newspaper in Szombathely reported: “Livia (Lili) Peto, wife of Dr Pal Windholtz, 46, daughter of late Jozsef Peto and the late Berta Kardos, died on 7 July 1944 in Auschwitz, Germany, of unknown causes.” Her death was registered four years after the fact, in 1948, by a decision of Szombathely district court as a formal acknowledgement of her death. In Auschwitz.



Later, research turned up more drama, both lucky and unlucky in the extreme. In 1936, Jolan was thirty-nine and freshly divorced. I put her name in the main international Jewish genealogy search website, Jewishgen.org and got this: “Jolan Boocz, maiden name Peto. Husband Ludwig [Germanised form of Lajos] . [Mother? This is blank.] Born 5 May, 1896. Budapest address, Tatra street 15/b. Page 43, Pass Number 6545, Case Number 0167.”

Everything tallied – this was amazing. This was our Jolan, getting a life-saving “Wallenberg passport” and moving into one of the Swedish Embassy’s safehouses. Did she actually survive the war? These documents did not say. I had no other clues, but this made me optimistic. I had a gut hunch that, for the most part, Jolan was a magnet for good luck. Jolan was a survivor.

I had lots of questions about these Good Luck Bad Luck Sisters. They seemed mythologically trapped by some weird see-saw of undeserved curses and spectacular rescues. I put Lili’s name in the same website, and found it on a depressing document: the deportation list from her rural Hungarian town straight to Auschwitz. Next, I found her name on a similar document, with a similar name, from the same address. Lili was listed there as “mother”.

Lili was a mother? Yes, Lili had a son! The name here was Andras Weisz.

I’d almost given up on her ever having had any joy. How great to be wrong again. There was her son, listed in a file named “Jews of Szombathely 1944”. Just like his mother, he too was deported to the same camp. Perhaps he was her only good luck in life? Even if he went to that camp as a boy? “Andras Weisz, son of Lili Peto, born 4 March 1929. Occupation: student. Address: 83 Ezred 36.” He’d have been fifteen in 1944 and would be in his late eighties if he were alive today. And, have a look at his birthday: “March Forth”! That’s exactly the day I came to Budapest to do this research, which was a nice little synchronicity and maybe even a sign of good luck.

He could be alive today. It was possible. I got way ahead of myself, wept at the possibility, jumped out of my seat. Then, I had to yell at myself to stop and think. First, he had to survive the death camps, and very few people did. I went back to survivors’ lists. This took a while, but the reward appeared. There he was. Andras Weisz, age sixteen, on a survivors’ list from Dachau. He’d been transferred there from Auschwitz with a forced labour group. As a teenager, of course, he’d have been valuable as a worker. Then he was liberated in 1945 by the Allied troops.

Andras survived the war! Then I really did leap triumphantly around the room, waving my arms. So, where was he? Where did he go?

These questions were beyond my abilities, but Karesz the genealogist researched it. He confirmed Andras did not return to his home town. He did not change his name while in Hungary. There was no death record for him anywhere in Hungary. It looked like he left the country, which most did. He could have gone anywhere. Most people in his situation left as soon as they could, and never looked back. He may have changed his name later, which many did, with no record of that here. Where on this planet would you start searching, or even under which name?

His grandma Berta and my grandpa Eugene were siblings. We were direct second cousins. In Berta’s memory, and at the prospect of a living cousin, my research was injected with a fresh burst of energy, but there were not many places for it to go. It would be many months before an accidentally lucky surprise would open a door. Meanwhile, I followed other story-lines, as with any soap opera, while the search for cousins crept into the land of living memory.

I might have a cousin. Berta’s grandson Andras might be alive.





CHAPTER XIX Lipot Made Me Cry at the Archives



Forty years ago, hardly anyone in Budapest spoke English. They shouted at me in German like I was a sweet but stupid dog who was also deaf. Over a month into this visit, I’d taken very little public transport. I’d been walking everywhere to get to know the place. Now I knew it better and was getting tired. Today I wanted to go somewhere too far to walk. I explored new territory in the XIII, at the Budapest City Archives. I was unsure every step of the way, all that long day. English-speaking helpers were needed.

Assuming I couldn’t possibly be right, I double-checked my instructions, and consulted three people at the 4-6 tram stop, all of us sheltering from a cold wind. There was a stout old guy with wiry white hair, a young mother with a pram, and a professional young man with a smart briefcase and sharp haircut but cheap jacket and scruffy shoes, so maybe still aspiring. They conferred on my behalf. The next tram arrived, the same line I should have trusted in the first several instances. They beckoned me. I went on trust.

Mr Young Professional was elected spokesperson. He told me in cautious but excellent English what I should do, step by step, clearly and concisely. Young Mother nodded in agreement, and quickly excused herself by focusing on her child, who was asleep and needed nothing. Mr Stout knew no English but wanted to participate, so he repeated the plan in Hungarian plus surprisingly effective mime. Here’s the translation.

Yes, you are on the right tram. (Points to carriage, does thumbs up.)

Go five stops. (Spirals a hand forward, holds up five fingers.)

Change at the big train station. (Jerks thumb to exit, makes “choo-choo” sound, makes train-like circles with elbow.)

Change to the underground, take the Blue Line. (Hand scoops below eye level, draws a long line, points to blue shirt.)

Go north, three stops. (Points up, three fingers.)

Then you are OK. (The almost totally universal OK sign of making a circle with thumb and forefinger, although this means asshole somewhere in South America, I heard.)

If it weren’t over the top, I’d have blown him a kiss. He was happy with a wave goodbye. Mr Young Professional, who diplomatically did not upstage Mr Stout’s performance, also got off at the choo-choo station, and re-steered me when I promptly went in the wrong direction. He escorted me like a polite nephew. He was not going to work, but to university, where he studied business and tourism. I repeated a dialogue I have enjoyed with dozens of strangers here.

“How long will you be visiting Budapest?”

“Two months.”

“So long! What are you doing?”

“I’m researching my family’s history.”

Eyebrows always jumped nicely at that point. “Your family is Hungarian?”

“Yes. My grandparents.”

Then came a warm smile, without fail. I was not exactly family, but a step above the fly-by-night party animals, or one-week-in-Prague-Vienna-Budapest whirlwinds. He walked me to the correct entrance, checked I had the right ticket, and helped me rehearse how to say my next step.

“Good luck with your career.”

“Thank you, madam,” he pronounced elegantly, and disappeared. A hundred years ago, he’d have kissed my hand. They used to do that here. Some old guys still say “I kiss your hand”.

I thought he was getting on the same train, but he went in the opposite direction. He had gone out of his way. He may well have returned to the same tram upstairs. He’d chosen the right career, had a promising future, and I’d even wager he’ll be a good dad someday. For all I knew, he too was a distant young cousin. As this research continued, with most possibilities of actual blood kin receding into the distance, perhaps I was wise to make do with whatever nephew types were right in front of me.

I was reminded yet again of a favourite story from a fellow member of an online Hungarian genealogy group who wished me luck before my trip. He’d made a trip like mine, seeking both family history and living cousins. He found lots of history but no relatives. Still, he had a great time and made new friends, people who had nothing to do with the family search. It started a new tradition, where he returned to Budapest and saw them every summer. He hoped to do so for the rest of his life. I started hoping I was on a similar trajectory.



On that stormy, cold morning, on my way to the Budapest City Archives, I was nervous. I wasn’t ready. I was floundering in a sea of disorganised questions and scrip-scraps. It was hard to know where to start. Of course, the place was massive. It was near the suburbs, by a four-lane highway and a cluster of massive, glassy, anonymous governmental buildings.

The archive was strangely quiet. It was the Thursday before a long weekend containing both Easter and Passover. Normal people were doing normal traditional things. I was expecting busy backlogs and long waits. But no, computers and desks were free. Staff were available, unstressed and helpful. They were even charming and witty. Tomorrow they got four days off, so a happy mood prevailed. What’s more, their best English speakers were on hand, luckily for me.

I had a list of reference codes related to about twenty notarised documents. They included property sales and purchase, house construction, a will, something that could be a prenuptial agreement, an IOU, the infamous Gift, and something marked “Mutual Agreement”. I liked the tone of that last one.

The charming, witty people behind the desk soon informed me that most of these were not digitised. So, their original volumes were ordered up, and I was to return next week. Then they would scan what I wanted for a nominal fee. Since I had a whole month, I could do a few such rounds.

The few things that were digitised were made available in minutes, and the archivists kindly gave me a quick translation of the main features. Basically, Lipot borrowed money, bought land, and erected some kind of building from scratch in a pretty part of the Buda hills. There were other documents about Lipot and Sarolta and other properties, so I ordered them too. Next week was filling up.

I got a much clearer digitised copy of Lipot’s last will and testament, which was in German as well as Hungarian. Lipot left different sums of money to his four differently assessed daughters, Roza, Lujza, Berta and Frida. Did they get different dowries in relation to what their husbands provided? Or was this in the irrational style of King Lear? Sad to say, whatever they got from Lipot either disappeared or was lost later. That I already knew.

The other task was to search out Lipot’s death registration; easier said than done. I’d already had a tough negotiation with the Grumpies at the Burial Society at the Jewish Archives, but they gave me the exact date of his death. Even with that new information, it was only a start. One needed to know the exact place of death too. You had to fish for that date in each of the twenty-three districts of the city, plus suburbs. This took time. I started with the district of his last known address in the V – and found nothing. I proceeded to the neighbouring VI (nothing), the next likely areas in nearby VII, IV and XIII (more nothing) and so on, eventually covering the entire Pest side of the river. No Lipot.

So, bureaucratically speaking, I had to cross the Danube and go up into the Buda hills to district I, one of the oldest districts of the city (nothing) and halfway through the II (nothing so far). This is where things went blurry. My eyes ached and needed a break. I stepped outside, drank some water, paced around, stretched my back, and gave myself a pep talk along these lines:

“Do this now. Do not say you will come back another day. It’s open late tonight until 7pm, and it doesn’t re-open for five days. You should have calculated for the holidays. Do not be a wimp. Sit your behind in that chair until 6.59pm, and fine-tooth comb every damned district of this city. Then on Tuesday, start the suburbs, then counties, then Slovakia and Ukraine and beyond.

“In a much bigger context, remember what Martin Luther King said: ‘If you cannot fly, then run. If you cannot run, then walk. If you cannot walk, then crawl! But just keep moving.’ Also, remember what Professor Shinichi Suzuki, the great musician and your mentor, said: ‘Don’t rush. Don’t stop. Just keep moving.’”

Just Keep Moving was the new motto. I went back inside – and found him three pages later. I don’t think anyone noticed the gasp, or the discreet weeping, or me wiping my nose on my sleeve. I had no tissues. See? Not prepared.

I’d wondered for forty years, and here it was in black and white – not in an index or transcription, but in the original document’s scratchy penmanship: Lipot was not born a Kardos, but a Kohn. He and Sarolta changed their surname in 1888, along with the seven kids. They were all Jewish, without question. This clinched it. I was witness to the original scrawl, with my very own bleary, teary eyes.

His parents were Jakab Kohn and Zsofia Deutsch. Lipot died age sixty-six of heart failure; this was reported by Good Old Uncle Rudy, dependable as always. He’d reported his mother’s death, and here he reported his father’s. If Lipot had siblings, now there was a chance of finding them. I’d been pining for that chance. It could mean a whole new bouquet of cousins. This hope fell quickly. There were no documents connected to a couple by those names. And, there were many, many Jakab Kohns. But I’d confirmed a lot about Lipot and co, and this was dazzling.

I found my way home without any trouble, like a proper commuter on the 4-6 tram, with a big smile on my face, strategising and forming the next experiment. If Lipot’s will was in German, and I got a legible copy, and it was short, would German Christophe of pub quiz fame take a look? This, in the language of scientific enquiry, was a strong maybe. Besides, I was invited to his birthday party next week and I knew he was partial to a bottle of red. The loopy script looked hard to decipher; that was the main challenge.

I was learning you can’t predict odds. And, it couldn’t hurt to ask.





CHAPTER XX Lipot, His Girls, His Legacy, 1912



Lipot was not a crazy King Lear, favouring only some daughters in the inheritance stakes, but momentarily it did look that way. His last will and testament was one page, simple and straightforward. Everything went to his widow Sarolta, his sole heir, with a few added “buts” to do with his four daughters Roza, Lujza, Berta and Frida. Because he had already given them dowries, half of those amounts would be subtracted from each inheritance, but no interest was required. There was no such payback for monies invested in his sons’ business ventures. As for the dowries, it was initially startling how different they were.

Roza’s was smallest, Berta’s not much more, Lujza’s twice that, and Frida’s three times. To look at it another way: Frida got about half of the total budget, Lujza over a quarter, Berta’s family (she was dead by then) about 15 per cent, and Roza less than 10 per cent. It wasn’t determined by age, or by number of children or grandchildren. It probably depended on the income of each husband.

Roza, the oldest, got the smallest dowry. Her husband Arnold Stark was a stockbroker, like her dad. Arnold’s brother Armin, his best man and a witness at their wedding, was called an “entrepreneur”. Maybe the Stark clan didn’t need help. Maybe they already brought a lot to the marriage table.

Lipot could not have known that Roza would be widowed with five children. She never remarried, but remained in Budapest, living with various of her children in a shared apartment. This was the place on Sziv street that Sarolta got from her mother. Rudy had power of attorney to sell it, but I don’t know if or when he might have done so.

Roza lived to the good old age of seventy-five. I reckon her kids helped support her during at least some of her lifetime. Her oldest daughter Margit was with her to the end, when they died within a week of each other in early 1945, right in the heart of the hideously bloody Battle of Budapest when the Russians pushed the Nazis out and themselves in.

Karoly, second oldest and Roza’s first boy, lived there with her until he married Gabriella Lichstein in 1921. (Good Old Uncle Rudy was witness, as usual, but this time he was joined for once by his brother Markus). “As per the memorial document issued by the Command of the 1st Pest National Guard Mixed Brigade, the husband is a veteran of war.” This was probably the First World War, when Karoly was in his early twenties. Many Jewish men fought for the Hungarian nation in that conflict but were persecuted or murdered by that same nation during the next world war. Karoly was alive until at least 1938. Roza’s youngest, Oszkar, was also living at the Sziv street place when he married Maria Zubek in 1933. He was alive until at least 1934. I was assuming they all supported their mother, Roza.

Her sister Lujza, second oldest, got the second biggest dowry. She married Jakab Jeno Neufeld, about whom I found next to nothing. Whatever he did for a living before and after he was a soldier must have been relatively modest if the dowry was correspondingly plump. They had two children: another Karoly, about whom I knew almost nothing, and Olga, who married a lawyer, then a doctor and then another lawyer. She became an increasingly intriguing figure.

Lujza legally declared her maternal generosity in 1913 in a document named “Mutual Settlement”. Here, her husband’s name was not listed as Jakab, like when they married, but Jeno. Names were much more fluid in those days. They were living up in the pretty Buda hills, in district II, Lovohaz street 15. The statement was short and sweet. In the event of Sarolta dying before her daughter Lujza, then Lujza’s share was to bypass her altogether and go directly to her children, Karoly the mystery man and Olga the thrice married.

Sister number three, Berta, who had already died when her dad Lipot wrote his will, had in theory received a dowry slightly more than Roza, whose was the least. It was unclear whether anything went to her widowed husband, Joe Peto. Later, as we have seen, Sarolta would bequeath gifts to one of her granddaughters, Jolan, but possibly not the other, Lili. Widower Joe appeared to have collected a variety of jobs, and it’s hard to say if any were lucrative, but usually he seemed to be in some kind of employment.

Frida, the youngest of the four girls, got nearly half the total dowry fund. At eighteen, she married the much older Sandor Gomori, an upholsterer. She also worked as a cook, according to her death certificate. These were not the highest earners of the bunch. Sandor died unexpectedly soon, only six years into the marriage, on 2 June 1902. A mere few weeks later, Lipot wrote his will and deposited it with a notary public on 3 July 1902. Frida remarried in 1904.

After the four daughters, Lipot and Sarolta had three sons, who needed no direct mention in the will since their mother would decide everything. First came Markus, who ran his own engineering company and looked as if he did well for himself financially. I didn’t think he had any kids. I had no reason to believe this other than a strange but strong instinct. After Markus came Good Old Rudy. I couldn’t find any kids for him either, and yet instinctively I believed he probably did have one or two. There is no explaining these sorts of guesses, which are at every turn in this sort of research. The challenge is to never let them become assumptions, which happens all the time, of course. It’s like continually picking bits out of your teeth. It’s never ever done.

Lipot and Sarolta’s inheritance plans probably excluded their youngest, Eugene, who was over in New York anyway. I doubt she sent anything to that sweet, soft son with the unfortunate history of gambling debt. She probably kept things quiet. He may have had a chequered past with gambling, but with Anna’s firm hand, they raised three sons who did OK and produced seven grandchildren – of which I am one.

So far, this is what I knew of our great-grandparents’ legacy, and the nature of dowries. In our contemporary times – with its romantic, find-your-soulmate ethos – it can be hard to remember that in the old days, marriage was a business merger. When you look at the whole picture, raw figures are only one of many factors. That’s why I usually decline to talk in raw figures.

Plus, there’s more, in terms of broad historical context. In the first decade or so of the 1900s, between the writing of Lipot’s will and when he died, the Austro-Hungarian korona plummeted in value, over and over again. Whatever amount he thought he was leaving was next to nothing by the time it reached them. They might have had property and possessions, but not cash.

Then after the First World War, the defeated Austro-Hungarian Empire was chopped into many smaller states with their own floundering new currencies. This would be followed by a desperate depression, and currency devaluation again, this time by literally thousands of percentage points.

Then, to add insult to injury, by the 1930s, 1940s and beyond, many such families had assets and property confiscated or destroyed anyway, as it was for centuries with various neighbours, lately by German Nazis, Hungarians either fascist or Communist, and finally, I suppose, by estate agents.

The fortune they built came tumbling down, floor by floor, decade by decade. It came and went, over about a hundred years. Besides their wills and dowries, also available to the general public were copies of a few Kardos women’s prenuptial agreements. Among them, to my mind, were a couple of bold whoppers. These were serious business people.





CHAPTER XXI Frida, Lujza, and More About Prenups



Frida Kardos had a prenuptial contract with her first husband Sandor, which was entirely illegible. More and more tantalising documents were popping up that were impossible to read. Sometimes it was not even possible to determine the language. I almost wondered if lawyers did it on purpose, as a trick, because with some of this chicken-scratching, neither side had a leg to stand on. Also, of course, one must never totally trust auto-translations. For example, the title of Frida’s document was returned as the phrase “Funky marriage prenuptial agreement”. Say what you like about online translators, they do have comedy value.

Every so often, I found something legible, and then a story could unfold. Sometimes a dam would break. The following is the prenuptial agreement between Frida and second husband Elemer Szente. I knew her first marriage produced a son, Laszlo Gomori, a writer. My mistake was to think that was all. This document said there were two more children. A sign was needed on the wall: “Even if you see no proof (yet), it still might be true.” This is subtle and damned tricky.

The widowed Frida, age twenty-seven with three (yes, three) young children, was living with her parents on Vorosmarty street. In this document, all concerned were listed and their identification confirmed. The following points were agreed:

The wedding will be on 2 October 1904, in Budapest.

The bride will bring 25,000 korona to the marriage.

The groom will handle the money during the marriage.

She will let him use all her belongings, gold, furniture, jewellery and valuables. They agree the value is 4,000 Hungarian korona for these items. He can use these items as his, now and until they are married.

(Did it sound like Elemer had not a bean to his name?)

She will give 2,000 korona each year to the common fund for them. She will pay this quarterly, i.e. 500 korona per quarter. In case she can’t pay, her parents will do so. If needs be, they will mortgage their house to secure the payment.

If Elemer dies first, and if they have children, then their children will get it all (and her three get none?). But, Frida can stay there and use everything in the house for the rest of her life.

If they have no children, then all his possessions go to his family.

If they divorce, she can buy a new flat and take her possessions with her.

If Frida dies first, and they have children, her property is inherited by her children, combined from both marriages.

If she dies and they have no children from their union, then he will get 15,000 korona, but he has to bring up her children from her first marriage.

Those children were Pal, Laszlo (born 1898) and Erzsebet. (I rushed to add them to our virtual tree, which was thrilling, then straight over to the Unaccounted For List, which was depressing.) There were other details, and everyone agreed and signed. Heavens, I had more cousins! They were kids when Jeno left. Pal and Erzsebet joined the Bye-Bye Jeno fantasy photo, stored and still growing in my mind. If these people had grandkids, they’d be in my age group.

I had no idea whether this was a typical prenuptial contract for its day. I had others to compare, mostly illegible or awaiting translation. For now, there was one from the other side of the family, the Spitzer side. Sarolta was the oldest of seven siblings, most of whom died young. The only two who enjoyed longevity were her and her brother Miksa, who had five kids, and of which Lujza was the eldest.

Lujza Spitzer’s prenuptial contract for her 1908 marriage to Dr Salamon Nagy was available to the general public. This “Dr” was a lawyer. At that time, both medical doctors and lawyers used the title “Dr”. So, another lawyer was joining the clan. This contract was rather shrewd, from her point of view.

First of all, her trousseau’s lingerie was serious. In fact, it was as serious and as expensive as all the furnishings combined. Was listing lacy underwear how you lured a prospective husband? The following list is quoted directly from this document:

The Trousseau: 48 chemises, 24 pantalons, 6 petticoats, 6 corsets, 24 pairs of stockings, 24 sets of bed linens, 24 sleeping caps, 72 handkerchiefs, 36 towels, more handkerchiefs, more underwear.

All of this was valued at 3,000 korona, as was the following list of her furniture:

Living room chairs and tables, 2 beds, 2 bedside tables, 3 wardrobes with mirrors, dressing table with mirror and chair, kitchenware, dining room cabinet, dining table and chairs, leather chair, 2 chandeliers.

Dr Salamon signed this knowingly, I assume. With this clan’s record for divorce, I was surprised they were together at least twenty years. But I was going to double-check that. I also found two property sales contracts signed by her and her alone. Maybe, like her Aunt Sarolta, she was a businessperson in her own right? Maybe he was shrewdly putting things in her name while pulling the strings? Maybe she and hubby were congenial business partners? I liked that last theory best, but I lacked facts. I just had a feeling these two found their match in each other, and created a formidable business team too.

Marriage, business contracts, and silky undergarments were all taken very seriously.





CHAPTER XXII Fruity Market Song



The Sunday Farmers’ Market in the Szimpla “Ruin Pub”, in the VII, was swingin’ today. Not swinging: swingin’. There was music every week. I was a regular. I got my extra-nice bread, fresh fruit and vegetables, a wonderful chilli sauce from a Mr Nice Guy, and soup for lunch. Previously the bands had been bluesy, funky or indie-rocky. Today was traditional Hungarian folky. All three musicians were wearing embroidered garb, all sang while playing traditional zithers, and the guy had a big bushy moustache in exactly that particular shape they have around here. They belted their song out with gusto. I was curious about it, and spoke to them afterwards.

“Do you speak some English?” The outer two pointed to the middle one, who shrugged and went red.

“What was the song about?”

She didn’t know what to say, and racked her brains. Another listener nearby helped, and it turned into a comedy. He too scratched his head, but it amused him to try, and my guesses helped, eventually.

“There is a man, climbing a tree, to get some fruit.”

“It’s a harvest song?”

“No, not harvest.”

“It sounds happy.”

“Yes, happy song. There are two people…” He holds up both index fingers and brings them together.

“Ah, it’s a love song?”

“Yes! Love song, but also a funny song. He likes her, he will stay with her forever…”

“Sweet. And, he’s getting the fruit – as a gift?”

“No…”

“They’ll have a picnic, like going on a date?”

“No, well, yes… Well, he’s saying: ‘I want to meet my…’”

“Lover?”

“Yes! I want to meet my lover, by the fruit tree. First I’ll pick the fruit, then we… then we…”

“I understand! ‘Picking fruit’ means ‘having fun’?” A smile and a wiggle of the eyebrows, and now we’re all laughing. The girls blushed deep red. Deep red cherries were in season then, by the way.

“Yes!” the poor man spluttered. “This is the meaning.”

Here’s a guess at the chorus:

Let me climb your cherry tree

Let me pick your fruit

Swingin’ zithers, let’s have fun

Baby, pick my fruit!





CHAPTER XXIII Marcel, the Good Lawyer, 1870–1936



Karesz took me back to the Kozma Street Cemetery, and we chatted amiably in the car on the way. I had the hang of the place a bit more, and brought sharable snacks and water, strong gloves and bug spray. Our first trip had involved a list of over twenty people and took the better part of a very cold day. This visit involved a shorter list, hotter weather, much sweat and many mosquitoes. It was worth it.

Two of Cousin Olga’s husbands were buried there. Her first husband was Marcel Hajdu (HA-ee-du). By the time I learned more about him, I’d turned him into a mentoring uncle figure: highly educated, quiet, gentle of manner, sharp of mind, piercing in the eyes. Here’s what the stone said, touchingly:

Dr Marcel Hajdu, Lawyer. 1871–1936. [In truth his birthday was 23 December 1870, but the birth was reported the following month, in January 1871.] Member of the Jurisdiction Authority Committee of the capital city Budapest. A representative of the Pest Israelite Community. A Deputy Chief of that community, who served the interests of his fellows and brethren. Let this memorial stone publish the everlasting love of his family, the devoted respect of his fellow citizens, and the grateful solemnity of the Pest Israelite Community.

That was all in Hungarian. The other side was in Hebrew. It said his Hebrew name was Moshe; his father was Jonah Ha Levy (Jonas Haberfeld), and his mother was Beyla (Barbara) Levysohn. Our Marcel was another name-changer: Haberfeld to Hajdu.

There was another name on the stone, his son Dr Janos Hajdu, 1904–1981.

His son? I didn’t know he had a son. My heart leapt, but too soon. Was this a son with Olga? No. Olga married Marcel in 1920, and this son Janos was born in 1904, so he must have been from a first marriage. Also noteworthy was the traditional Jewish naming of the boy Janos after his grandfather, Jonah. Later I confirmed Janos was indeed the son from Marcel’s earlier marriage to opera singer Ilona Kis. He too was a lawyer and worked for the Hungarian Bar Association.

Much later, I found a tiny document that said Marcel and Olga had a son named Tamas. This meant a thrillingly real cousin. But nothing more could be found about young Tamas. This was frustrating, but I was still delighted Olga had at least one child of her own.

Marcel seemed a very good man. I added another nickname, The Good Lawyer. Further evidence supporting this claim arrived from a man who wrote to me via a genealogy website. Marcel was on both our trees. This distant cousin of Marcel’s wrote: “Dr Marcel Hajdu VIP was a senior member of many civil organisations. He worked primarily for the Bar Association. His (most) outstanding court case was the protection (defence) of Rabbi Immanuel Low, in an anti-Semitic lawsuit in the 1920s. He also acted as a politician.” At the City Archives, I found many lists, over many years, of those who attended monthly city council meetings, representing special interest groups. He was there, every single month, for many, many years. It looked like Marcel was a pillar of the community. I felt proud of him.

Also while ransacking public records, I found notarised items about his representing a variety of individuals and organisations, including a circus. The famous and long-running Beketov family circus was a client between 1910 and 1919. This was welcome comic relief, in between all the tortured civil rights cases. The index only said he witnessed the circus making certain bank deposits. I imagined large rumpled sacks of cash, smelling of elephant dung.

My imagined Marcel had a dry sense of humour. He was the wry, wise, gentlemanly uncle who winked now and again. You can start liking someone you never met, and I liked this Marcel I was inventing. I felt genuinely bad that he and Olga split up after eleven years. By 1931, she was divorced and marrying number two of her lawyer-doctor-lawyer trio. Dr Jeno Barsony was a highly distinguished doctor, later a leading mentor, but they divorced as well. Were these men workaholics and therefore neglectful husbands? Was she a fickle, picky or difficult young thing? Or was it just bad luck?

I’m sorry to say that, instinctively, I felt slightly cooler towards Olga – except I remembered that her third marriage, to another lawyer, was in 1937, when life for Jews was difficult at best, and soon to become deathly frightening. Unlike many, she did not change name or religion, and stayed who she was without hiding it. I had to admire that. In her shoes, I may not have been as brave and honest. I may have hidden like a mouse, and instantly lied when challenged, all in fear. I can’t even imagine such times.

As for Olga and husband number three, Bruno Savolyi (SAH-voy), I didn’t know what had happened to them. They were on the Unaccounted For List. However many times Olga married, and for whatever reasons, I hoped she somehow escaped the horror. That did not seem likely. I knew the second marriage with the doctor had borne no children. But the goldmine of this strand of investigation was that Olga had Tamas with the Good Lawyer Marcel. Like Unlucky Lili and her son Andras, at least she had that. Plus, I had another cousin.

There were other pursuits at the cemetery. So far, I’d concentrated on the Kardos side. Here came a chance to visit one of Sarolta’s people, one of the many daughters of her brother Miksa. Gizella, or Gizi, was the second oldest of four girls and a later surprise baby boy. She married Zoltan Vajda, a lawyer, who was buried here. I could not find where she was buried. The reasons for this might be 1) She died much later, and was buried elsewhere, but I found no death record. 2) They were divorced, but where was she buried in any case? 3) Her burial place was not known, if she died in the Holocaust or in the war. 4) There is some other unknown reason, which seemed most likely.

Zoltan’s headstone said: “Died 27 June 1929, 51 years old. We have embraced his memory into our hearts. May the blessing of God and eternal peace dwell above his remains.” He was buried with his father: “Sandor Vajda. Born 15 December 1846. Died 8 June 1914. 68 years old. He is mourned by his loving wife, children and grandchildren. May he rest in peace.”

Grandchildren? Were some of those grandchildren from Gizi and Zoltan? Maybe. This added more potential names to the Unaccounted For List. Also buried there was Sandor’s wife, but (and I disapprove) there was no mention of her first or maiden name. She died on 18 December 1936, age eighty-two. I wanted to know about her grandchildren!

And finally, the fruitless search for Lipot’s father was one I could not let go of. How many Jakab Kohns were in Hungary? You may as well ask how many John Smiths were in England. I found a possibility that was far-fetched, but I had to try. We thrashed through much undergrowth, in the end to conclude this man could be anyone. The stone only said: “Jakab Kohn. Died 1902, age 94. Mourned by his children and grandchildren. His Hebrew name was [looked like Havia, more likely Tuvya] Ben Mendell.”

We paid our respects all the same, whether he was our Jakab or not.





CHAPTER XXIV Dr Barsony, the Good Doctor, 1894–1969



The second in Cousin Olga’s lawyer-doctor-lawyer husbandry series was also buried in the Kozma Street Cemetery. His headstone was elegant and simply said: “Dr Jeno Barsony, University teacher, 1894–1969. And his wife Livia, 1909–1992.” So, Dr B remarried. The split from Olga did not scar him too badly, then. I was glad he found someone new – someone close enough to share a gravestone. I felt instinctively sure, mainly via fictionalising, that he and Olga were not right for each other. His marriage to Olga did not last long at all, but it looks like his second marriage to Livia did.

Livia’s maiden name did not get a mention, which made her hard to research. She was fifteen years his junior, Olga only one. I wanted to know more, especially how they got through the war. There were no children listed on this headstone. Was it a niece or nephew, perhaps, or yet another distant cousin who arranged for Livia’s burial?

I went to the Jewish Archives down the street, as advised, although I was also advised that the information I sought was not always given out. Sometimes they told you who had paid for a burial and sometimes they did not. Every time I tried, they did not. This time was the same.

So far, I knew Dr B was an obstetrician and gynaecologist who became a hospital head of department and a professor at a medical school. His appointment as a teaching doctor was reported in faraway Britain’s Jewish Chronicle newspaper: “29 June 1962. Hungarian Doctors Get Top Posts. Four eminent Jewish doctors are associated with the Extension Training Institute for the Medical Profession, recently established in Budapest. They are: Head Surgeon Dr Bela Molnar, Head Oculist Dr Pal Weinstein, Chief Nerve Specialist Dr Jeno Rakonitz, and Head Gynaecologist Dr Jeno Barsony.” He was then sixty-eight, born a few hours from Budapest, but seems to have spent all of his career in that city.

He was a professor at the then Budapest Medical University, now called Semmelweis and home to thousands of students from all over Europe. It has several different libraries, archives and departments, so I had to go to some wrong ones first, of course. Also, the medical museum at one end of town sent me to a different archive at the other end of town. This helped me further familiarise myself with Buda, and the tram map, and I was rewarded with a goldmine and a helpful archivist.

The metallic plaque outside listed a few departments with lengthy names and medical prefixes. I rang. Eventually, a stout man answered – so stout, he was cubic. He knew no English and stared hard, suspiciously. I think he remembered the Communist era, knew nothing else, and frankly rather missed it. He was of that age, like so many Grumpies on the buses who stared so accusingly, as reported by every expat I met. These hard-staring types were of the same style, same breed, same generation.

He had every right to dislike people like me who could not speak Hungarian, but he decided grudgingly to practise professional tolerance. I pointed at the sign. He dropped the stare and let me in, then grumblingly phoned upstairs, complaining about something being in English. Then he shooed me away from his cubicle, indicating I should wait at the base of a beautiful staircase, in the centre of an astonishingly opulent mansion.

The nice Dr Laszlo Magyar came gliding down the elegantly swirling stairway, which was plushly carpeted and lined with massive oil paintings. He’d be happy to help, if he could. He was surprised to get a live visitor since most of his enquiries came by email. He led me to a large room with more oil paintings, statues, dark wooden furniture, huge chandeliers, general sophistication and wealth. When I said the name I was researching, his eyebrows shot up.

“Dr Jeno Barsony? He is famous!”

“He is? Really?”

“Oh yes. Well, he had ups and downs. He was very right-wing and nationalistic, so later he fell out of favour, could only work in scientific research…”

That did not sound like our guy. If it was our guy, it explained why no one wanted to talk about him when I asked in the hospital. Dr Magyar fetched the right volume to check, a fat tome with the history of all staff of that institution up to 1956. He scanned the index, smiled suddenly, and sat back, surprised.

“There are two Dr Jeno Barsonys who lived about the same time.” He scanned both biographies. “Ah. Now. These are two very different people. Very different.” He tapped his finger gently on the two very different blurbs. “This one was right-wing, anti-Semitic and famous. That one was a Jewish obstetrician, not so famous. So,” he added lightly, “which one is yours?”

“The obstetrician, not so famous.”

He seemed relieved, so I assumed he was either Jewish, or at least not anti, or a mixed cocktail like me. You can never predict where people’s sympathies lie. We settled into our plush chairs in that ultra-plush room while he read and translated, and I transcribed.

Dr Jeno Barsony was born on 12 May 1894 in Miskolc, Hungary, originally of the surname Bornstein, which his father changed when he was only a small boy. He earned his MD in 1918 from Budapest Medical University.

In the First World War, he spent four and a half years in the military, one and a half years at the front. Because he was not fully qualified as a doctor at the time, it’s unlikely he served as a medic, but rather as a fighting soldier. In that war, many Jewish men fought for the Austro-Hungarian Empire, but in the Second World War, it was another matter: “forced labour battalions” of Jewish men (ages sixteen to sixty) served the Hungarian army on the front lines, without weapons or supplies, generally brutalised as slaves.

From 1918 to 1929, Dr B served as a physician at the Hospital of Bakats Square, Budapest IX. Today, it’s a small medical centre. From 1930 he was a physician at Szabolcs street hospital, which no longer exists. It was the hospital of the Jewish community of district XIII and, at the time, was the best hospital in the city: the most modern, most advanced, and best equipped. In fact, even Admiral Horthy, under whose eyes over half a million of his Jewish citizens’ lives were sacrificed to the Nazis, went to this Jewish hospital when he needed the best care available. After 1956 it was the home of the Institute for Advanced Medical Studies where Dr B was head of his department.

He started working at the university in 1930. From 1946, he was a “Magatanar”, or a private lecturer, a member of the university staff. In 1952, he was awarded a “candidate degree”, a scientific degree named from the Soviet system of scientific qualifications, between medical doctor and academician, like a post-doctoral degree. In 1965, he was the President of the Committee of Gynaecology and Obstetrics of the Scientific Committee of Public Health – an important national post. He died in Budapest on 5 July 1969.

Dr Magyar dug around elsewhere, then concluded this was the sum of their information. He added some history of this gorgeous building, housing a total staff of four. It was built in 1927 by actress Ilona “Ica” Kormos; in the Second World War, it was an army hospital, then a children’s hospital, then in 1956 it became a historical library covering medical topics up to 1956. Just about everything in Hungary seemed divided into before or after that revolutionary date. He wasn’t sure where more recent documents might be but suggested I explore the main campus.

How did a Jewish doctor get through both the Second World War and the Communist era, and still manage to work at all? I’d read so much about practices destroyed, and there was no explaining his survival during the random chaos of warfare. Many Jewish doctors, lawyers, pharmacists, engineers and other professionals were deprived of their livelihoods, businesses, homes, bank accounts and their very lives – but not all. Dr Magyar emphasised that doctors were too useful. Being a doctor could be what saved you.

Some older or retired doctors escaped deportation but were incarcerated in the Ghetto, and possibly some managed not to die of starvation or disease. The young, strong ones were often sent into hard labour. Some escaped into safehouses in “the other ghetto”, the XIII, “the International Ghetto”, in which conditions were nothing as bad as the total incarceration of the VII. Here, safehouses were raided only occasionally. The fake fronts worked – or delayed things. As for doctors in those times, about 11,000 doctors lived in Hungary, including about 4,500 Jewish ones. Of that 4,500, only 2,500 survived the war.

Dr B did not need a safehouse, it appeared. His address remained in the heart of the city centre, district V, from 1936 to 1950. He continued to work as a professor at the university medical school until his retirement. There were a series of uninterrupted listings for him in the phone book emphasising he had room for new patients. He also worked up in the XIII, not just at that highly respected teaching hospital but maybe also behind some of those fake storefronts during the worst of times. He not only survived, but he worked and served, and taught in a long career, to a good old age and a long second marriage. I wished he’d kept a journal, about how people survive all that he’d seen, and I wished that journal would fall into my hands.

Another observation was that during the 1960s and 1970s, obstetricians and gynaecologists were some of the richest doctors around. All general medical care was provided free by the state, but you could pay to go privately. The other group to do well financially were people in the arts, such as writers and musicians. That seemed a strange combination but was a ray of light in an otherwise dark story.

Dr Magyar’s own father had personal experience of how doctors survived the war. He was sent to serve as a doctor to a Serbian “labour service” unit, and even hid his mother and sister there – for a price – and they survived. But, Dr M’s grandfather was captured by the Arrow Cross Party (Hungarian Nazis) and was “last seen near the Austro-Hungarian border, then he disappeared, probably killed when he could walk no further”. Two-thirds of his family, Jews living outside Budapest, were killed in Auschwitz-Treblinka, including infants, children and old women.

Compared to going to an extermination camp, “labour service” saved the lives of hundreds of thousands. Dr B survived, became a professor to young doctors, and led a life both useful and in no way wasted, war after war after war.





CHAPTER XXV Miskolc, Bad Luck, Decent Wine



Dr B was born in Miskolc to Samuel Bornstein and Terez Hartmann, both from that area too. It’s about 150 kilometres from Budapest or a few hours’ drive. I went online to gather a small bouquet of facts, since I wasn’t likely to visit for real. Today it’s Hungary’s fourth largest city, the provincial capital of Borsod County. It’s home to about 150,000 people, grown from 15,000 in the first census in 1786. Traditionally it was known for heavy industry, but more recently for a blossoming tourist industry plus seasonal festivals of opera, film, popular music and wine-tasting.

Lowlights of the last hundred years are many and varied. In the early part of the 1900s, the city was overrun by the Czech army, a vicious cholera epidemic and devastating floods. In the Second World War, tens of thousands of Jewish and other persecuted residents were taken from Miskolc, sent directly to Auschwitz and gassed to death on arrival. A memorial stands there for them today. That list included an Erno Barsony. I thought it probable he was Dr B’s brother, but I had no proof. The city of Miskolc and its residents, in all previous centuries, suffered even worse. They were clobbered by everything history has to offer, assaulted from all sides, by all sorts. Yet, they regrouped and rebuilt with determination every time. These were resilient characters, and I imagine they still are.

It was lucky to find full names of both parents of Dr B, the Good Doctor, as recorded on his wedding day to our cousin Olga. Dr B’s parents had other children. The main Jewish genealogy website, Jewishgen.org, dutifully cranked them out from its Hungarian birth records department, one year after the next, like a woman with no access to birth control.

Dr B was the youngest of five, born in 1894. The five kids spanned seven years. Erzsebet was born in 1888, closely followed the next year by Emma. Erno, the first son – possibly the one mentioned above – was born in 1890, then another girl, Szeren (lovely name), in 1892, and finally Jeno. Their 1906 name change from Bornstein to Barsony, duly noted in the birth records in the usual way, occurred when the oldest child was eighteen and the youngest was twelve. On our branch, Eugene was only four when they changed his surname, while his oldest sister Roza was eighteen. It was probably easier for the pre-schoolers to adjust than for young adults with developed lives, identities and networks.

This name change was noted, as I have now seen hundreds of times, with the two boys, but not with the three girls. Maybe these teenage girls were expected to marry soon and change their names anyway? Then I saw poor Szeren, with that pretty name, died when only a toddler. The eldest, Erzsebet, did not yet produce any documentation of a marriage or children. I also didn’t know whether Erno was married or had children, or what he did for a living. Then came exciting news. The second eldest, Emma, didn’t stay a Bornstein for long. She changed her name in 1906 by marrying Adolf Kellner. They married in January, and efficiently produced son Imre nine months later. Imre fell into the Distant Cousin But For Sure On Our Tree category. He was a contemporary of my dad, about eight years younger. If Imre had kids, they might be about my age. Quickly I scampered through another search, found three Hungarian Imre Kellners born that year, got excited, then saw they were from different parents. Maybe late at night is not the best time for this. Genealogy fans will recognise with some pain how easy it is to get carried away and waste time. Still, in truth, Dr B had a nephew – Imre Kellner – and Imre was on our tree. He might be an in-law on a distant branch, and it might be a thin, shaky branch, but he was on it.

Then I found an Erno Barsony on a list of Hungarian Jewish lawyers in 1944. It just said his name, home city and a “Magyar guardian” named Ferenc Tolnay. I wish there was more, to assure me it was our Erno, Dr B’s brother. I proceeded anyway to explore the following general trend: “Magyar” here meant Hungarian Christian. Because I am occasionally an uninformed, naïve idiot, I didn’t at first see what may be duplicity at best. What “guardian” means here is questionable. It’s like the early days when I found a document called “Jews of Szombathely in 1944”, and thought it was a census document. No, explained the historian, sadly. It was a Nazi deportation list to a concentration camp, heavy slavery and probable death.

As for Erno Barsony, could his so-called Magyar guardian be a sponsor of a Jewish lawyer, a Hungarian Christian who worked with him or vouched for him? Or was it double-speak for exactly the opposite, as with stolen spoils of war? Lists were already made of businesses run by Jewish lawyers, doctors, pharmacists, engineers and other professionals, which were then “assigned” to Gentiles. “Assigned”?

The relevant database on Jewishgen.org said: “Lists of aryanization were published throughout 1944 announcing the removal of Jews from the fields of medicine, engineering, pharmacy and law… and the names of Christian caretakers are given.” “Removal”? “Caretakers”?

“The publication contains the full name of the advocates, the city where they practiced, as well as the names of the Christian advocates who took over the business.” “Took over”?

Dad was a lawyer, precise with words and facts. Did the words “caretaker”, “assigned”, “took over” mean respectively: “thief”, “grabbed”, “confiscated”? If you are “removed” from your business, and it is “given” to a Christian, how are they your guardians? Theft and reparation issues are painful, heated, controversial, and on-going. According to this database, after the war, international legal groups and a series of conventions “created a list of Hungarian lawyers, many, if not most, of whom were murdered in the Holocaust”.

It seemed likely it could have been our Erno’s name on that memorial wall. I knew I mustn’t guess the odds, because the odds were nothing to do with survival. Whatever happened to Erno – lawyer or not, in-laws or not, offspring or not, I wished I knew. To whatever degree they were forgotten, let them now be remembered, at least here, with respect. For now, this was all I had to offer in the telling of Erno’s story.



As a final topic, let me offer a pleasant detour and a glass of wine. This is about the city of Eger, a neighbour of Miskolc, and home of Bull’s Blood Wine. Egri Bikaver is the name of the only Hungarian wine I’d ever heard of. It’s a popular export. Egri means it’s from the area of Eger, and Bikaver means bull’s blood. It’s reputation from the old Communist days makes some roll their eyes, but others say today’s offerings are well worth drinking. I say this requires more research.

The city of Eger, the county seat, is smaller than Miskolc, and best known for an ancient castle, beautiful historic buildings, thermal baths and spas, and also its wine. The story behind this wine’s name is connected to the 1552 siege of Eger, attempted by Suleiman the Magnificent – the longest-reigning sultan of the Ottoman Empire, ruling from 1520 to his death in 1566. During that time, he ruled over an estimated 20 million people. When a man like that sets out to invade Hungary, it was no small matter.

His target, the city of Eger, was defended by a much smaller force. Allegedly, to rev up those outnumbered troops, there was a ritual feast with great food and plenty of the local red wine. Legend said a bull’s blood was mixed with the wine to fill the soldiers with bullish strength. What else could explain their successful resistance? Suleiman went home. Eger kept its castle.

Now that’s what they call full-bodied.





CHAPTER XXVI Updates on the Girls



Great-Aunt Berta and the Good Luck Bad Luck Sisters had been weighing heavily on my mind. Jolan and Lili were two years old and two weeks old, respectively, when mother Berta died. It looked like the two were not raised together. This saddened and troubled me, and I felt sure there was some reason for this. It saddened and troubled others, too, when I first published these stories. It raised passions and hackles. My stories seldom divide my listeners into two arguing groups, but this one did. I heard staunch defences of the separation, insisting it must not be questioned: families just do things, you can’t ask why; it’s not your business, do not judge.

On the other hand, there were other discussions along these lines:

Why would anyone separate two tiny siblings like that? Lack of funds?

No. Grandma Sarolta had property and money.

Lack of space?

She had plenty of space. She kept one of the two girls.

Could she have taken both?

Sure.

Could their dad?

Sure – I think so, with help, if he wanted.

Why didn’t he take them both?

I wish I knew.

Would you split up two young siblings like that?

Never, not if I could help it. But that’s what happened. There must have been a reason.

I suspected Joe and mother-in-law Sarolta couldn’t agree. Maybe each taking one child was the only way. Sarolta raised Jolan in their posh city flat, and bequeathed her all its contents and a dowry, a wedding and all the trimmings. Lucky Jolan survived the war through clever connections. On the other hand, Unlucky Lili grew up modestly in the countryside, away from her dad and her family, was widowed young and died young in Auschwitz. Lili’s good luck, however – unlike her sister – was that she had a son, Andras. If only she knew that he survived what she did not.



Jolan had a surprising groom. A gossipy morsel emerged from five years before her wedding to Lajos in 1927. Back then, his profession was listed as Lieutenant, not journalist as was on his marriage certificate. I had discovered a notorised statement about him, and a criminal court case, and I was looking forward to ordering up that document. Now that I knew how to do that, I was at the City Archives every week, pestering them smilingly for every possible document containing our people. Procuring each document took a few days. Then the translating took longer, but that backlog had to wait, sometimes for years. The idea was to collect like crazy for now, while I was here, then comprehend it later. In this case, the summary didn’t even say whether Lajos was the accused or not, which was annoying.

Then I found his Prisoner’s Record. In 1923, our Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz stood before the Territorial Bodies of Jurisdiction for his Prisoner Registration from the Royal Criminal Court of Budapest. There was no mistake: it was him, with the correct birthday, address and mother. The charge was “crime against the social order”, which might mean anything, and didn’t seem much. Breach of the peace? Drunk and disorderly? Anti-social thuggery? Or something more political? These and other nosy questions were duly noted. I had already ordered the maximum number of documents allowed, twenty-five at a time. Sometimes, I didn’t exactly know what they were, but photographed everything in sight. I was only here one more month, after all. I calculated how many dozens of documents could be procured in that time, since this clan obviously had endless activities.

I had to admit, with possibly misplaced mischief, that a prisoner’s tale would be refreshing. Previously, I’d been awash with Good Doctors and Good Lawyers, admirable and successful people. Too much looking up meant a sore neck. There had to be at least one ex-con, and Lajos was our man. He might be the first of many, who knew?

Disappointingly, his misdemeanour didn’t sound serious. Jolan was either forgiving, or worldly, or had no idea what he had done before they married. Maybe even Sarolta the matchmaker and sponsor didn’t know. Obviously he’d try to hide a prison record. Instinctively I felt Sarolta was the kind of matriarch who usually knew everything and gossip seldom evaded her. If he’d tricked our grande dame, she would not be amused.





Frida’s “Funky Marriage”


This mistranslation deserved to live on. Frida had two “funky marriages” and the second ended in a shrewd divorce contract that nailed Elemer good and proper, brokered by none other than Frida’s elusive brother Markus. Here, another naïve myth bit the dust, and tasty gossip emerged. Frida was married at eighteen and widowed at twenty-five, with three very young kids. Two years later she married Elemer Szente, a clerk, who took full responsibility for her three children from the first marriage. They also had a daughter together, Angyalka. Decades later Elemer and Frida were both incarcerated in the Budapest Ghetto. In 1945, they died within a few months of each other, at the very end of the war. I concluded, by way of wishful thinking, that even although her first marriage was short, her second one was long and therefore good. How wrong I was. They were long-divorced. Later I’d find documents showing they were at different addresses for many years. As for the actual split, that document emerged from the archives with the innocuous title “Property Settlement”. In its first paragraph, the key phrase was “because this marriage was having problems…” It was a very long document. They split around 1915, so the marriage lasted eleven years. They both lived until 1945, and she kept her married name all those years, which was one of the terms of the divorce. Here’s a summary of the main points:

Marital difficulties were declared to a notary public, and a property and financial settlement was negotiated. Daughter Angyalka was born in 1905, one year into their marriage. When she was ten years old, Elemer was required to sign the aforementioned document promising to pay an allowance to Frida of 110 korona per month, plus 40 to the angelic daughter. Here’s the tasty bit: these figures pertained while he continued to be employed by the Phoebus Electrical Company. Guess who owned that company? Frida’s brother Markus Kardos. Whatever Elemer’s position was with this company, and whatever his salary, he also sometimes earned commissions over and above that. Of those commissions, he was to hand over half to Frida. Or rather, these amounts would be subtracted at source.

If there was any additional income over 500 korona, he had to give a third of that to her as well. Plus, if he worked elsewhere and earned over 420 korona, then he still was to pay the aforementioned 110 korona to Frida and 40 to Angyalka. In this way, the Kardos clan continued to employ him, but took it back with the other hand, making sure it went to their Frida and her four kids. I sensed the paternal shadow of Lipot in all of this. I also imagined Lipot had a strong hand in engineering the prenuptial agreement signed by Elemer, when he agreed to totally support her three children from her first marriage. The rest of Frida and Elemer’s lengthy document involved a list of figures and a list of belongings.

As research deepened, Great-Uncle Markus moved closer to the spotlight. He certainly had his sister’s back. I felt he preferred power unseen in the shadows, which is ironic for an electrical engineer.





CHAPTER XXVII Still in Budapest, Summer 2017


Did I say I was staying another month? That’s not what happened. I stayed another two. Thanks to the convenience that is teaching on the internet, I could even stay all summer, but prices here skyrocket. I was now a regular at the pub quiz twice a month, which offered an amusing and witty range of topics and people. Christophe and Claudio were officially a couple, and acting a bit more like it in public. I didn’t even know they were gay. But all was made clear over the weeks at the pub quiz, until I ended up at Christophe’s birthday party, full of smart, funny, interesting people of all kinds. After that, whenever I was invited over, they went in my calendar nicknamed Mr C & Mr C.

Local eateries knew me well now: the Indian, the vegan, the nearest Hungarian, the Vietnamese, and more. Last month, most of them could call out my order as I walked in, since I always got the same favourite. This month I varied it. Conversely, I wasn’t always walking to a new unexplored part of town but had favourites to repeat. I occasionally saw Kata over food and chatter. She was firing on all cylinders, with work, PhD and family. I almost remember having that kind of energy, but not really.

My room was a riot of notes on the wall. All lists were up, spawning sub-lists. Kardos siblings x7, Spitzer siblings x7, Szende siblings x5, etc. Places to visit, people to search for, documents to locate, questions to ask, addresses to locate, and, of course, the Unaccounted For List. It was quite a cast. I hadn’t counted, but it must be over 200 characters, maybe 300. I was surrounded by questions hastily scribbled on scraps of paper (bread wrappers, food cartons), happy to be in a city where it felt like potential answers were all around me. So, I didn’t stay another month. I stayed another season.

Despite an urgency to research as much as possible while here, not knowing if or when I might return, now there was time to enjoy the city, too. Let me present three of my favourite excursions from these weeks: Bartok House, the Museum of Applied Arts, and the 1953 football “Match of the Century” between Hungary and England.





Bartok House Museum


The life of twentieth-century composer Bela Bartok is presented in this museum created in his former home. Many Hungarians do not particularly admire Bartok’s modern classical music, which is often thought too weird or aggressive. But they all know he collected folk songs from all over Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, Transylvania, Serbia, Slovenia and Ukraine, amassing over 8,000 in all. Despite chronic ill health and a generally weak constitution, he travelled in a crude horse cart on even cruder dirt roads, carrying a typewriter, suitcase and an early gramophone recorder that used wax cylinders. He took these cylinders home and painstakingly transcribed them into what turned into many, many volumes of a folk music encyclopedia. Most of this was before the First World War. He asked rural people to sing into his strange recording gizmo with the big horn. Many believed it contained a devil that would take their voice away forever. It took some doing to persuade them it was safe.

In 1940, the Second World War was unbearable, so he went to New York. It’s saying a lot when you go to New York City for peace and quiet. The war went on and on, his health went down and down, and he died there before he could return, but his ashes were brought back to Budapest. A chain smoker with severely weak lungs, he died of leukaemia. You can see one of his old cigarette butts in the museum. It was found in a piano. The whole place was vibrantly beautiful. He adored folk art and filled his home with colourful, hand-crafted wood, textiles and ceramics. He also collected thousands of insects and wildflowers, cataloguing them by Latin and Hungarian names.

His last composition, the Third Piano Concerto, has handwritten in the score the words “The End” at a point that is clearly not the end, but was where he was too weak to go on. A student helped him finish it. It was premiered in Budapest by my former mentor Dr Nagy.

The largest group by far to visit this museum were Japanese, followed closely by Americans, and the distant third group were miscellaneous Europeans. Our guide thought his popularity in Japan and the USA was because of the wide use of the Kodaly method of music education, developed by Bartok’s long-standing colleague and dear friend Zoltan Kodaly who frequently joined him tromping through the countryside, helping catalogue folk music. All said he was quite a different man at work, compared to his personal life. Photos and stories seem to support this. By nature, he was shy, quiet, frail and in need of protection. At the Liszt Academy, he was known for being very strict and scary. Dr Nagy said that on the one hand, everyone completely respected Bartok’s genius, and were in awe without reservation. On the other hand – and he thought carefully before choosing his words – if you were in a room with Bartok, all you could think of was how to get out of the room.

Hungarians almost never visit the museum, our excellent, intelligent guide told us. One per week would be a lot. Nobody in our international group found that surprising. All agreed that whatever the nation, local talent is better appreciated outside. My own favourite Bartok compositions are his string quartets and the piano concertos. I agree his work can be very percussive, and maybe that’s why, on strings, something paradoxically magical happens. Many of my students played his Mikrokosmos, I recalled nostalgically while sauntering down the exit path, past a funny, sweet deer statue in the garden. It was a fine, fine Sunday, and I became an even more affectionate fan than before.





Museum of Applied Arts


This museum houses useful things that also happen to be beautiful, one of my favourite combinations. I enjoy the fine arts, but I get particular pleasure from a place like this. It is filled with extraordinarily artistic works that also have a purpose such as furniture, ceramics, glassware, textiles, clothing, clocks and musical instruments. True, some were so exquisite you would put them in a glass case and never dream of touching them. But most were both useable and also works of art.

Favourites: Blue glass pitcher shaped like a dog, the rooster vase, the snake plate and the seafood plate (but rather small for any real seafood). I was amazed at all the wood inlay furniture, one of our family’s favourite hobbies. There was a series of three ceramic tiles entitled “Dancing couple, arguing couple, and a prophet”, which summed up our species in a novel way.

Favourite story, from the Bauhaus and Le Corbusier influenced architects and designers:

The conference table in Breuer’s office was a slab of granite on a set of stainless steel legs joined at top and bottom by a continuous X-frame. Although it resisted force applied directly to either side, it had a disconcerting tendency to twist if pushed at an angle, after which it would swing in recovery with a barely audible hum. Joe Neski called it the “tuning fork” table, and once teased Lajko about it, who replied, “But it’s very interesting”.

As many know, these architects were revolutionary and visionary, and had no regard for the wishes of the people who might live in the apartments they designed. They hated that people had other ideas for furnishing the interiors. They were very clear that people must be re-educated to change their idea of beauty, to conform to the architects’ theory that “Pure function is beauty!”

No it isn’t, not for most people. A lack of beauty is a lack of beauty: no warmth, no colour, no comfort, no individuality, no interest, no engagement. This architecture uses plain, severe, dry, cold white concrete cubes. Budapest is filled with exactly the opposite – things which are functional as well as beautiful. Why choose? Have both. Dr Nagy was right on that score too.

There was a strange addition to the afternoon. It looked like a college event. Students in regulation black dress were playing Renaissance and mediaeval chamber music on period instruments to a very high level of musicianship. This accompanied a fashion show of contemporary, slightly bizarre designs worn by young people with painted faces and space-age hairdos somewhere between Princess Leia and Jane Jetson. There were metallic epaulettes, gauzy insect wings, a dog-style cone collar, a transparent cubist skirt, a geodesic dome cape, and some strange veils. These were presented as cocktail dresses or evening gowns, or maybe theatrical costumes, or even works of art, not to be worn. Oddly, the music changed over to a very good brass ensemble which performed an elaborate big band version of “I Got Rhythm”. Twice. Interesting programming. There was no sign, banner, announcer or pamphlet explaining what this was, and after watching, I decided not to ask. They were students.

The museum was wonderful and is highly recommended. While the main exhibits are not huge, there were four or five different exhibitions on at one time, and maybe more when there are no fashion shows in the main courtyard. Speaking of which, the building itself is an amazing work of art. It was a totally engaging afternoon.





Ferenc Puskas, 1927–2006


If you hate sports, skip this section. But if you appreciate international drama, you’ll know that football is a top rate soap opera, even if ardent fans don’t like my saying so. Any season of sports unfolds like a drama. I rarely follow sports, but I sometimes follow how others follow the World Cup, Game of Thrones, or whatever the latest serial drama is that’s gripping people in their millions. I may not exactly empathise with their pain or their glory, but I certainly sympathise. Drama is drama, whether the style is Shakespearean, tabloid, athletic or otherwise.

On our tour of the VII, we passed a huge mural celebrating a key moment in European football. I was supposed to know what it was, but did not, so I did my homework. Even for a sports idiot like me, it was fascinating. One of England’s worst public humiliations was when the national football team was thrashed on home ground by Hungary on 25 November 1953. Witnessing arrogance knocked out of the sons of the Great British Empire, it must be said, is a global pleasure. UK headlines read: “The Match that Stunned the Nation” and “The Match of the Century”. England as a nation was shocked to get beaten 6-3. Why? The English had the weakness of complacency, and the Hungarians had Ferenc Puskas (FER-entz PUSH-kash).

The Hungarians were then “The Golden Team”, ranked world’s number one, Olympic Gold medalists the year before, and on a run of twenty-four straight wins. Former England manager Sir Bobby Robson admitted the English, with no such record, still assumed they’d demolish them, that the English were the masters and the Hungarians their pupils. It was exactly the opposite.

The England team expected certain patterns of play, and struggled with surprises. Their defenders were marking a particular number, not whoever played a given area. The Hungarians were totally fluid, all over the field, and unpredictable. My favourite example is how Puskas scored via his soon-to-be-famous “drag-back”: as England captain Billy Wright tried a tackle, Puskas quickly dragged back the ball with the sole of his boot, while Wright ran after empty space.

Sir Bobby Robson also remarked that this one game alone changed their thinking, entirely.

“It was the mother and father of a good hiding,” wrote Clifford Webb in the Daily Mail. “I can only hope it will have a revitalising effect.”

That’s exactly what happened. The England team plunged into innovation, adopted a new system, and won the World Cup thirteen years later in 1966. Many say that because Puskas was central to crushing England in 1953, he can be credited personally with England becoming world champions. “Puskas Ocsi”, or Puskas the Lad, is consistently included in lists of the top ten players in the world, in the history of the game, ever. This is right alongside Pele, Maradona, Beckham, Ronaldo, and I’ll let you argue about the others. Most documentaries of the history of the sport will include at least one if not more of his ingenious, spectacular goals. Even Pele rated him as one of the all-time top three – and envied his left foot, which it clearly pained Pele to admit on camera.

In 1956, Puskas controversially defected from Communist Hungary to join the Spanish club Real Madrid. An older player of twenty-nine by then, with a conspicuous belly, he lost 18 kilos (40 pounds) in two months to qualify. Some say that, without him, Real Madrid would never have become a champion team. Their and his fame and fortunes rose together.

By the end of his career, he’d scored eighty-four times in eighty-five international matches for Hungary, and 514 goals in 529 European league matches. In 1952 he became an Olympic champion. He led Hungary to the final of the 1954 World Cup where he was named the tournament’s best player. He won three European Cups (1959, 1960, 1966), ten national championships (five Hungarian and five Spanish Primera División) and eight top individual scoring honours.

After retiring as a player at forty, Puskas coached all over the world. He was one of the only defecting players to be officially exonerated during Hungary’s Communist regime, and was able to return to his native land in 1981. He was head coach of the national team, and Hungary’s largest stadium was named after him.

Puskas died in 2006, age seventy-nine. Hungarians of all political persuasions came together in a national mourning unlike any other. It was similarly moving how both northern and southern Ireland passionately adored boxer Barry McGuigan when they were seldom united about anything else. No one thought blacks and whites would dance together in the streets, but they did in President Nelson Mandela’s new South Africa when their national team won the Rugby World Cup.

Sports can be great, global, human drama. Even as a sports idiot, I respect and enjoy that.

Also, my research here paid off at the pub quiz when Puskas was the answer to one of the questions, and I was the only one who knew it.





CHAPTER XXVIII Markus Kardos, Virginia Jaut



I admit I accused Great-Uncle Markus of being a sly dog, hiding his wife for so long. But I was blind. I thought I’d memorised all seventy-five documents perfectly after one read-through, and this was not so. I’d built a picture of workaholism, empire-building in electrical engineering, dying young in his late forties of a stroke as a dry bachelor. Wrong. Going back to Markus’s death certificate showed he left a widow named Virginia Jaut, and they were living on the big Terez korut (boulevard) where they’d been for many years.

Now I had her name, the internet confirmed the existence of a joint will the couple had notarised in 1922. The very next morning, at the City Archives, I held the real deal in my hands: an actual paper copy of Great-Uncle Markus’s will. Mind you, this document was followed two years later in 1924 by a Revoking of the Will. That set off a few questions.

Someone changed their mind, or something or other changed. Whatever it was, my first fear was that Virginia had been dealt bad news. The index made it look like he revoked the unrevokable. I ordered the revoking document, which would arrive the following week, as would a mysterious third will, done later. The plot had become a soap opera, especially with this annoyingly effective cliff-hanger right before the weekend. What was Dark Horse Markus up to? What follows are the key points of that first will, some of them extremely sharp and pointy.

Markus’s wife Virginia Jaut came from an upper-middle-class family – whose family business was also engineering, like Markus. She was addressed as “Lady” throughout these documents. This is not to say she was titled nobility, but that utmost formal respect was being paid, and maybe some upper-middle-class pretentiousness. They had no children, said the document. It was emphatic there was absolutely no one else to inherit Markus’s electrical engineering empire or his savings (or his debts, if any). That’s a strange comment on his six siblings and numerous nieces, nephews and cousins, and hers too. If Markus died before Virginia, everything went to her; if she died first, everything went to him.

“We both declare that neither of us has the right to partially or fully change this, or cancel it, or annul it.” Two years later, he cancelled and annulled it. The year after that, he died. I suspect he knew he’d die before age fifty – and was aware of that throughout this legal process, which is heart-wrenching. I hadn’t seen any subsequent will or other clues yet. They were ordered and would arrive the next week, and I had to wait. Delayed gossip is always annoying. Why would he revoke their will? Or could it have been done jointly?

Here’s what emerged later: When Markus revoked the marital will in 1924, Virginia was at their same address until Markus’s death in 1925, according to his death certificate. She was later listed in the phone books titled as Widow, so they did not divorce. The phone books also said she was there until 1929. No death certificate had so far surfaced for her, nor any news after that date.

However, during the next round at the City Archives, I learned that in 1929, her address was different, now in the VIII, Illes street 18, which belonged to her parents. This was on a document of sale. Virginia sold the marital home to someone with the same maiden name, Jaut. The buyer was Gabriella Jaut, aka Mrs Alrik Sunden-Cullberg, from Stockholm, Sweden. I did not see that coming. Was this a sister? Meanwhile, if Virginia really moved from the VI to the VIII, cliché said this went from middle-class comfort to poorer, working-class shabbiness. But maybe she simply went back to her parents and the family home, a middle-aged widow.

After the joint will was cancelled, Virginia wrote a surprising will of her own. In it, she referred to selling her marital home to her sister Gabriella, whose husband Alrik’s profession was listed as Chief Executive Officer (CEO), and hers as Wife of a CEO.

I’d been envying Virginia’s wealth for a bitter while now. This was the richest set of siblings ever to marry a Kardos. In terms of sheer wealth, the Jaut sisters out-Zsa Zsa’d our Zsa Zsas by far, even if they lost it later. Their fall was dramatic.

This document spelled out that after her husband Markus died in 1925, Virginia spent several fortunes (his, hers and Gabriella’s) on medical treatments and foreign spas. Here’s the dirt, so to speak, quoted from the document, via my translator, Kevin:

19 September 1927, Notarial Records Department. The notary stated he knew “Lady” Virginia Jaut Kardos personally, and that she was the widow of Markus, who died two years earlier in 1925. She was still living in their marital home, the flat in Budapest VI, Terez korut 30. Her sister Gabriella was identified as the Wife of a CEO in an insurance company, living in Stockholm. Virginia stated:

I am selling my sister Gabriella this whole property and all of its contents, which are listed here:

In the bedroom: 2 beds, 6 horsehair mattresses, 2 nightstands, 1 dressing mirror, 1 double wardrobe, floor lamp, round table, dressing table chair, Chesterfield sofa, big painting by the artist Kemedy, 1 mirror with inlaid crystal ornamentation, 11 different sized Persian carpets, and other small items.

In the dining room: 1 table, 6 chairs (4 regular, 2 armchairs), 1 resting “fauteuil” [sofa], 2 dressers, 1 standing clock, 1 huge bronze chandelier, 1 standing lamp, 1 small round table, 1 “day table” [small table?], 1 sofa, 9 oil paintings, including one by the artist Jamor.

12 personalised cutlery sets, including 89 pieces with initials engraved, 12 personalised crystal service (glasses) with 48 pieces, 12 personalised porcelain cutlery, coffee service for 12.

3 hand-embroidered shawls, huge tablecloth of crocheted lace, 7 large silk pillows for the couch, 3 velvet curtains, 2 marble sculptures for the dresser [sideboard], 1 “boulette” [serving bowl], with silver spoon and silver-plated tray, 2 fruit bowls, 1 oval shaped fruit bowl, 2 crystal vases with inlaid crystal and silver. 5 silver teapots and coffeepots, on silver-plated trays, 5 smaller and 2 larger bronze figures, 4 bronze vases, 1 huge marble ashtray with bronze figure on it, 1 smaller ashtray, 2 big Japanese vases. In the hallway, kitchen and bath: 2 chairs, 1 wall in the hall [and did they mean a wall clock?]

1 pair of sparkling cut gem earrings.

It was noted that Gabriella took the earrings, but later returned them to Virginia, for her to keep until her death. This was a change from the previous will, when they were intended for a different sister. Those earrings moved around.

Virginia stated that money was given to her by Gabriella for her long-term illness, during which time she paid for medical treatments, foreign sanatoriums and spas. The amounts that Virginia’s husband Markus paid out were also mostly provided by Gabriella. (Gabriella was supporting Markus? Was he not a colossal mogul? That wanted following up.)

This agreement had been discussed verbally before by the two sisters. They here agreed that everything was written according to their verbal agreement, and Gabriella would buy everything. Also Gabriella declared, according to their bond of sisterhood, that she would give it all to Virginia to use for the rest of her life. She would continue living there as before, and Gabriella would own it only in name until Virginia’s death.

In addition to this sales contract, Virginia also declared she had one piece of Persian fur, which was given to her by Gabriella. Should Virginia die first, it should be returned to Gabriella. Then Virginia stated that, with regard to everything mentioned here, she had no further payments due, nothing to pay, no loans involved and nothing owed, for anything. Gabriella declared her willingness and ability to support Virginia. This was witnessed by the notary, read out loud to all parties there, and all was agreed and signed on 19 September 1927. Virginia was alive until 1929, or at least her name was in the phone book. Then she was fifty-three. After that, I don’t know what happened to her.

I was wrong about Markus cancelling their joint will in 1924. They mutually cancelled it. It was through a notary who knew them both well, plus two witnesses – a wholesaler and a locksmith. The happy couple Markus and Virginia cancelled their will and declared it more than invalid, in fact “as if it never happened”. All was agreed, cancelled, witnessed, signed and sealed in the usual legal notarised way. If he or they jointly wrote another, I haven’t found it.

She, however, wrote her own immediately. Anyone can see it at the City Archives. It stated it was Virginia’s own will, just for herself. She used the same notary. The witnesses this time were housewife Terez Jozsa and photographer Sandor Salgo, residents at the same address. I didn’t assume they were a couple, but likely neighbours in the same building. Mr Salgo’s profession as photographer reminded me painfully of our dire lack of photos of any of our people. He may well have photographed Markus and Virginia. It was certainly a custom of the day in those circles. If there were any, they were lost, no doubt, with all those other things listed by Virginia and sold to Gabriella.

In Virginia’s new will, nothing went to Markus. “All my belongings and properties should go equally to my siblings.” Eyebrows jumped. I only knew of sister Gabriella, but Virginia was second oldest of nine siblings: Robert, Virginia, Vilmos, Jeno, Gabriella, Hermine, Hedwig, Rudolf and Anna, all born between 1874 and 1893, with the last one, as usual, a surprise after a long gap. Hedwig was also Mrs Vilmos Lukasz, and Hermine was Mrs Adam Hartmann.

In this will, Virginia announced Hedwig would receive the earrings that did so much migration, while “My sister Hermine gets the gold ring with three gemstones, two pearls, also two Persian carpets, twelve sets of cutlery (silver, monogrammed, Louis XIV). Gabriella gets the clock with inset diamonds. Hermine’s husband gets the marble and bronze clock, also Louis XIV. All the rest should be divided equally to the five of them.”

Out with Markus, in with siblings. This was the thinking behind Virginia’s new will. After Markus died in 1925, she re-thought quite a lot. In short, she blew her fortune, bit by bit. Blunt yet naïve is her revision of the will, adding a page. That document, if you can even call it that, was a scribbled piece of paper without any witness, notary or official stamp at the very back of the folder the archive gave me. It was followed swiftly by an admonishing correction from her lawyer – and it was desperate:

Please add to the above will. As of 1925, I the widow of Kardos Markus cancel the previous will. I’d like to declare that all my previous wills, especially the 1924 one, 22 July, are cancelled. After this, with a clear mind and regardless of any influence, in case of my death, I want the following declared: I don’t have any fortune, because all of my things were sold to my sister. I sold the apartment, received payment for it, and I have spent it all, already. I have no other fortune, other than the gold ring with the three gemstones, which I want Hermine to have. The platinum clock should go to brother Robert. The brooch of sapphires should go to brother Vilmos. I also have 4,400 pengo [an old currency, not worth much] in Markus’s company called Phoebus. If this money is still there, by the time of my death, then this goes to sister Hermine. I want Hermine to handle this money, which goes to Robert. If Hermine doesn’t want to, then sister Gaby can.

There then followed an absurdly complex fuss over an added note that the 4,400 pengo, probably amounting to pennies, was given to Dr Zala Hugo, as well as Nadasdi Tibor, to handle. This too was not notarised, signed or witnessed. In a subsequent document, the notary had something to say about that. It was addressed to, and signed by, both him and Virginia, on 19 September 1927. The notary declared:

I know Virginia Jaut Kardos personally. She lives on Terez korut 30. She gave me a paper with her will, and she asked me to take this will to have it notarised. I reminded and warned her that these documents should be clear and obvious, and signed and witnessed, to make it official. She said that she wrote and signed it, and wanted it to be all proper. Therefore, this will, I have put into an envelope, and sealed with an official stamp. All was agreed, signed, stamped and sealed.

In the absence of a will for Markus, the law was strict anyway, but he and Virginia both knew good lawyers. They made different decisions about their siblings. He excluded his. She excluded hers too, at first, then later bequeathed them everything, in a jumbled, confusing way. I did not envy whoever detangled it, but if it was all gone, then it was simple, except for baubles. I suspect Virginia may have moved to Sweden to stay with sister Gabriella, aka Mrs CEO. I assumed all the above-mentioned gemstones were scattered one way or another, collected by neighbours, Fascists, Nazis, Communists, Capitalists and others, roughly in that historical order.



Next we have the popular tale of a Chinese ambassador, a Swedish king, and how we are actually connected to both of them. There are about ten steps between our people and the King of Sweden. Yes, this is a ridiculous trail involving in-laws of in-laws and exes, but it’s based on facts, is extremely well documented and, strictly speaking, is true.

1. Granddad Eugene Kardos had a brother named:

2. Markus Kardos, who married a well-to-do lady named:

3. Virginia Jaut, who due to illness lost both her and his fortunes, becoming dependent on:

4. Gabriella Jaut, her sister, who was helped, and was far wealthier, through two rich husbands;

5. Her first husband, the Chinese ambassador to Sweden, was Tsou Seng Tchang. Their son:

6. Gabriel, named for her, occupation “yachtsman & diplomat’s son”, married:

7. Swedish Countess Marianne Very-Long-Name, heiress, ex-actress and TV cook, philanthropist (dyslexia, an issue with her brother), and, in 1985, voted one of the world’s best-dressed women. They had three children but divorced. She then married:

8. A Swedish prince, the second son of the then:

9. King Gustaf VI of Sweden (r. 1950–73), grandfather of their current king:

10. King Carl XVI, who has reigned since 1973.

Those Jaut girls knew how to marry. It was like a tabloid gossip column. What’s even more ridiculous is how royals mostly marry each other. So much documentation poured in, I had to put blocks on the genealogy websites with this tree. If one of these royals bores their way into your tree, many will follow, like termites. One has to block them.

They get in via Myheritage.com. It cross-references your tree with those on other sites (Ancestry, Family Search, Geni) that share people in common with you. They then send you notices. I got hundreds, all relatives of that one clever countess who married guy number six above. It was like being under siege. They were showing up all over the place, banging on my door repeatedly. I drew the line when Queen Victoria and Prince Albert marched in. That was too much. This was then declared “a dead story”, as journalists say. Pull up the drawbridge, lock the gate and flood the moat.

The only exception I made was for the exceptional marriage between Mr Tchang – the Chinese ambassador to Sweden – and Great-Uncle Markus’s sister-in-law, Gabriella. A European woman marrying a Chinese man around 1920 was bold, I reckon. I admired that. Maybe they both had money and didn’t care, but I’ll bet they got black looks and a lot of backstabbing. I say good for them. Be bold.

Tsou Seng Tchang was a thin, bespectacled, refined and charming-looking fellow, judging from the one photo available on Wikipedia China. It’s sure he came to Sweden in 1920, but they had their son in 1919. It’s not clear where they met, or where their son was born, but one assumes either China or Sweden.

Since he seems to have been in China between 1914 and 1920, and his son was born in 1919, shall we assume they were married before then and were out in China together? I certainly wanted to know how this daughter of Budapest got to China via Sweden, or was it another route? Another scenario is that, in 1913, he had been the Chinese ambassador to Belgium. Maybe they met then? She’d have been twenty-one in 1913. Seven years later they were (presumably) married and had had Gabriel. One thing was sure: if Gabriella went to China in the early 1900s, she deserved double boldness and respect points.

According to Wikipedia China, Tsou Seng Tchang was first a diplomat in Germany, then in Brussels, and finally, in 1920, he was transferred to Sweden for about three years, before returning to China for good in 1923 to die two years later when his son Gabriel “Toto”, the future yachtsman, was just six years old. It’s not clear whether Gabriella was widowed or divorced, but later she married the Swedish insurance magnate Sunden-Cullberg. When Markus died, Gabriella assumed full financial responsibility for her sister Virginia, his widow. There was still no clue as to Virginia’s whereabouts after 1929.





CHAPTER XXIX Good Old Uncle Rudy



Rudy lived a few years longer than I thought. That nice if small news was one of the latest things to come to light. First, I don’t know if he’d like me calling him Uncle Rudy or not, but I do. His birth certificate said Rudolf Kardos, but most documents used his Hungarian name, Rezso. I’d hit a halt in finding any new information about him or wife Aranka. They’d slipped into the background but they shouldn’t. In revisiting each person’s file in my last month here, as part of my newly-invented Bye-Bye Budapest ritual, Uncle Rudy’s file felt poignantly thin and overdue some attention.

Rudy was everyone’s favourite uncle to witness weddings. His brother Markus was too busy building the electric infrastructure for Budapest North and the Ujpest suburbs. Before he was married, from 1912, Rudy lived with his parents in the family house in Buda I, Margit korut 28. He married Aranka Hollander, but I can find no records of children. In fact, I could find few records at all; there was a spooky lack of records in their case. So, I was stuck on that trail, but I did not forget him. I’d built a fictional persona for him as a warm character, a sympathetic potential dad-turned-helpful-uncle, a reliable type who’d be on time and a steadying hand at your wedding, for example.

He was a bank manager all his life. He and Aranka lived at the same address for forty years, and he kept an office nearby on the same road. The only time he left was to set up his kid brother Eugene in New York. When Rudy blazed that trail to NY, I figured the young bank manager went to supervise the family investment and deliver it safely and directly into the hands of the business partner, George the Elder – the large, white-haired man with cigar in hand in the photo of the bar. The main theory was that George was in charge of the cash, while Scary Anna kept Eugene on a short leash, in general. In many photos, Eugene wore a sweet if vague and passive, even lazy look. He looked like the baby of many siblings who did everything for him. Of that brotherly trio Markus, Rudy and Eugene, I saw Bossy, Diligent and Babied. I can see why Dependable Rudy was called in to set things up. That bar worked for about ten years; then there was the garage, then insurance, but it was often said that some dark cloud followed Eugene and rained on whatever he tried.

Having only tracked Uncle Rudy up to 1939 on family documents, I added him to the Unaccounted For List. Then I became adept at checking old Hungarian phone directories online. He was at the same address until 1950. I hoped it wasn’t just a posthumous name on the account. I hoped it meant he survived the war. I strongly felt he probably did.

Damjanich street 25/A is today a cheap plastic knick-knack shop, painted a zingy pink you can spot blocks away whether you want to or not. For decades he was listed as a banker, then there were no phone books during and just after the war. Three-quarters of the city’s buildings were either destroyed or substantially damaged. Phone books resumed in 1948, and from then until 1950, Rudy’s name was still there, now listed as retired. He’d have been in his late sixties. My fictionalised Rudy was sturdy if not portly in build, a serious, yet huggable guy. If he lived into the 1950s, then he’d have been an enemy of that Communist state, so I can’t imagine he escaped problems. I saw him then as more run-down, thinner in frame and hair, grateful to survive at all, not without a fed-up look in his eye. If he was lucky.

It was a guess. I didn’t know where the next clues might surface.





CHAPTER XXX A Murder, a Dictator, a Potato Shed


A year before the Good Lawyer Marcel Hajdu married Cousin Olga, he was accused of a homicide. He was released quickly, and no charges were pursued. That arrest record gave the same address as a year later, when Olga would move in as his wife. It was in the VII, Foherczeg Sandor street 19. It was not the first time Marcel was arrested and the charges dropped, but it was the worst charge. Just previously that same year, criminal proceedings on a charge of agitation were launched against him and four other lawyers. He was forty-nine. All charges were dropped. Judging from what was on file, it sounded like he’d been hounded for a while. Maybe that was part of being a civil rights lawyer in the 1920s. There were charges in 1927 of slander, libel in the press, and also harassment. These were dropped too.

Oddly, a 1932 document authenticated his identity and signature in connection with a “patent use licence”, which was curious. What invention was being patented, I wondered. One oddity was a 1908 document about a marriage breakdown and nullification. The details were exasperatingly difficult to read. It could be his first marriage to singer Ilona Kis, the mother of his son Janos. Illegible gossip is annoying.

In the same folder was the following case when Marcel was accused of being a highly paid Communist, hiding in a garden shed. This whole episode was bizarre. Lawyer Marcel took some work with a theatre company but got more theatre than he bargained for. They put on some sort of performance on a Communist theme, and he got tarred with the same brush. He’d been harassed before and this was much the same, but with a plot twist involving potatoes.

The first statement was a kind of character reference from a group of people, all confirming that Dr Marcel was patriotic, amiable, and did not in any way act unpatriotically. The next document was a statement made at the police station, with the official police stamp and letterhead.

Report number 223170. 1 October 1919. I declare that in the case against Marcel Hajdu, I carried out the investigation. During that process, the following list of people were found to be connected with the theatre company and its actors. These were Marcel’s character witnesses. They said he was qualified to do his job there, which was purely financial, and was at their request. He was always strongly against Communism, and never spoke in favour of it. There was no evidence against him, and nothing that would support him being charged or taken to court.

Next, for some reason, came Department of Police Crime Report Number 2231707, for one Mr Bela Kun, accused of committing multiple murders, and who requested Marcel to be his lawyer. That call was not recorded as being answered. Bela and Marcel were also neighbours. Assuming this was the infamous politician Bela Kun, then more needed to be researched. No one, but no one, had a good word to say about Kun, including his former teacher Vladimir Lenin, who repudiated Kun entirely as being too aggressive.

Bela Kun’s reign of terror was a time of repressive violence meant to crush any opposition to his short-lived Communist republic. Tens of thousands of their opponents were held without trial, and an estimated thousand were killed. Assuming this is the same man, then either Marcel kept some questionable company, or he couldn’t shake off this person who never took no for an answer, and used violence or threats like breathing – something for which he was infamous.

Bela Kun was founder of the Hungarian Communist Party and head of the Hungarian Soviet Republic, which lasted a mere few months in early 1919. This was after the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire at the end of the First World War, after Hungary lost three-quarters of its land and after the so-called Aster Revolution, which established a shaky post-war Social Democratic coalition government.

Because of his leading role in a violent demonstration in which four policemen were killed, Kun was arrested and charged with high treason. He remained in prison until 21 March 1919. Bizarrely, he was allowed to continue directing Hungary’s Communist Party from his cell. His most seductive yet useless promise was that he’d secure Soviet aid against Hungary’s fierce enemy, Romania. On the strength of that, a new coalition was formed, he was released and, even more bizarrely, the very next day he was made Commissar for Foreign Affairs in the new Communist–Social Democratic coalition government.

For an assortment of chaotic and idiotic reasons, Kun’s regime soon collapsed. He fled to Russia, leaving a trail of untried charges: high treason, multiple murder, embezzlement, robbery, agitation, and more. He left before Marcel had to answer the request to defend him, and eventually died in the late 1930s in Stalin’s purges. By 1920, Kun was gone, and Hungary was led for many years by Admiral Miklos Horthy, the controversial man who later would be so disastrously and tragically useful to Hitler, and whose statue today hides behind bullet-proof glass.

Back in late 1919, after Kun’s fall, if you wanted to tar someone’s name, any link to him would do. Since Marcel went to the same club as Kun, and was being considered as his defence lawyer, that was plenty of mud to sling at him.

Both Bela and Marcel knew Dezso Foldes, who ran the above-mentioned theatre group, as all three were members of the Feszek Club. It was founded in 1901, and during the socialist years, artists and politicos alike could share honest views inside. It still exists, by the way, as an arts centre putting on concerts, plays and exhibitions.

Next in my hot little folder came the statement made by Marcel to the police about working with this theatre group. “I accepted this job that paid 1,800 korona (per month). It was official payment, on the books. You can write to the accountants to double-check. I confirm that I have never been interested in politics. Please ask these witnesses that are listed, and there are others too. I want to introduce these documents that contain the results which will free me from these accusations.”

Here the absurdist black comedy hit its peak. The next piece of paper was very small, like a casual memo. There was no official letterhead. It looked homemade. Although typed, it looked like a note you’d pass in school when the teacher wasn’t looking.

17 Aug 1919, Budapest. From the police of the Communist regime, head of department. I respectfully inform you that Dr Marcel Hajdu, lawyer, was a main organiser of the event last May, which was a celebration of Communist propaganda. During the whole regime, he worked beside other Communists, and was paid a high salary. Now he is hiding in his property in a wooden shed or outhouse. Most respectfully yours,

Ede Jakabfi, Kobanya [a suburb of Budapest]

This was a mere couple of weeks after the new coup. What an imaginative informant. It may not be accurate information, but what a great attempt at harassment. Ede Jakabfi may not even exist. It was that sort of note. A joke. Allegedly.

Kevin the translator, a university student, couldn’t believe it. He said they learned about these things in school, but he was amazed to see a real example. Meanwhile, Dr Marcel continued defending himself. The next document said:

25 Sept, 1919. Statement made in the police station, by Dr Marcel Hajdu, 48 years old, Jewish, a lawyer, divorced, with two children… [There was Janos from his first marriage, so who was the second?] He has committed no previous crimes. He presented the following statement:

“I didn’t have any role in the Communist propaganda celebration event last May, 1919. During that time, 10 May, I was part of Budapesti es Budai Szinkor, a theatre group. I was taking care of the finances of the company, for 1,800 korona per month. I got this job via my friend Dezso Foldes, director of the company. For head of their finance office, he was looking for someone both trustworthy and against Communism. He’s also a member of the Feszek Club, which is where he asked me to take this job. This is my relationship with these actors. My duty was to send members their income, which was previously calculated by someone else. I just did the transactions. Besides that duty, I also checked how the money was handled. During this time, I had no other role. I didn’t participate in any demonstrations. As for proving that I didn’t take part in any part of the actors’ politics, I have several witnesses.”

Here he listed the three most famous national theatre heads of the day. And finally, it’s a pleasure to present the concluding part of this letter, which had us in fits of joyous laughter.

“I do indeed have a property at the previously mentioned address, where the aforementioned wooden shed stands, which I personally use, and where I go two times a week, for picking potatoes. By the way, I also have a permanent address, where I live, and where I am currently working as lawyer. Signed, Dr Marcel Hajdu.”

Kevin smiled that in the original Hungarian, the sarcasm was truly classy and delicious. I already liked this guy Marcel, and now I loved him. What style. Also, what patience, to put up with such harassment, with confidence, even wit. There was a lot of ugly violence in the world in those years, more than I could withstand, and not funny at all. If he could keep his cool and sense of humour, he had my full respect.

Marcel and Olga married in 1920 and divorced in 1931. Their divorce in no way diminished my interest in him. The desire to locate his descendants (Janos and Tamas) climbed up a notch on my priority list. Oh, to buy their descendants a coffee or a beer one day, and raise a glass to absent friends. Or dare I say, comrades?

As a lawyer, Marcel worked for the Hungarian Bar Association, so we wrote to them hoping to find out more. My days here were winding down, so I was not sure we’d hear in time. They answered the next day, suggesting we show up the day after that, very early in the morning. My flight was that afternoon. It was going to be a busy day.





CHAPTER XXXI Jailbirds, Mistakes, Effie May



I found more jailbirds, or at least potential ones, pending confirmation. This was welcome. Enough with ethical civil rights lawyers, devoted obstetricians and the innocently righteous fallen martyrs at the hands of Fascism. It was time for ex-cons. We were in the Deutsch sub-branch now. The connection was this, step by step:

Granddad Eugene’s Great-Aunt Fani (born 1819, his mother’s mother’s sister) married Samuel Deutsch (born 1809). Samuel and his siblings were born in the Felvidek area of northern Hungary, now Slovakia. He and his brother Mark Moritz (born 1810) spent their grownup lives in Budapest.

Mark Moritz had a daughter named Johanna (born 1858, in Budapest). This Johanna, from now on, will be referred to as Poor Old Johanna.

There were a few Johannas in this tree. The main one was Eugene’s grandma, Johanna Nathan. She was sister of the above Fani Nathan, and of an older generation. As for the younger Poor Old Johanna, two out of three of her sons were frequently in court.

Poor Old Johanna married Samuel Schwarts Szekacs and had three kids named Gyula, Karoly and Max. They all arrived in the world between 1883 and 1889, which makes them contemporaries of Granddad Eugene, so he must have heard the stories. There is no way gossip like that did not travel like lightning, especially with so many lawyers in the family.

Did one of the Kardos lawyers defend them? That would be too weird.

The story so far: this “document of criminals” is from the Royal Public Prosecutor’s Office of Budapest (1946 Budapest State Attorney’s Office records). Karoly is identified in 1927 as about age forty, Jewish, a newspaper editor. He was residing in Budapest VII, on the grand Erzsebet korut, near where I was staying, and where I got the good old 4-6 tram most days. He was accused and convicted of “misdemeanour fraud by the press”, possibly a mangled translation that sounded like libel. It was not a full-on murder charge as with Good Lawyer Marcel, but what this story lacked in drama, it made up for with frequency. Karoly went to court seven times. He was acquitted every time.

There were three times in 1925, when he was either news editor or supervising editor. In 1926 he was charged along with fellow editor Arpad Erdelyi. There were three more times in 1927. All his details remained the same, and so did the charges – and so did all the acquittals.

His brother Gyula did not enjoy the same luck. He had three guilty convictions on the books. The document title was “Prisoner Pedigree” – meaning category? His “Prisoner Registration”, the first of three, was in 1907. He was identified as Jewish, unmarried, an upholsterer’s assistant, living in district VII at Wesselenyi street 20 – the same street where Frida Kardos’s second husband Elemer died by suicide, in the ghetto hospital. What was then the upholsterers’ area of town was also not far away. Gyula may have known Frida’s first husband, Sandor Gomori, an upholsterer and furniture merchant. He’d have been an old hand to the younger Gyula. I even hoped he was Gyula’s boss, but that’d be too coincidental. Still, in the small world of Jewish upholsterers in Budapest, it’s not far-fetched they knew each other.

Gyula was charged with “private document forgery”, which commenters agreed was likely forging contracts or identity papers. In 1910, he was done again, by then promoted to Master Upholsterer, and having moved house to Kiraly street 47. He was still single, still Jewish, and it was the same charge as before. There’s something almost sweet about a failed forger. He was either not devious enough, or not bright enough. Again in 1910, he faced the same charge, and again he did time inside the Budapest National Penitentiary. Poor guy. Poor Old Johanna.

I have only scratched the surface of this new Deutsch branch that blossomed so heartily after Great-Aunt Fani Nathan married Samuel Deutsch. There were forty new cousins with spouses and more. To give you a flavour of how prolific they were:

GGM Sarolta Spitzer Kardos’s mother, Johanna Nathan, had two sisters, Lena and Fani. Fani married Samuel Deutsch, from Slovakia, and it was a rather fruitful union. They had ten kids – that I can find, anyway, and if more turn up, I will not be surprised. The range was from 1841 to 1873. They were Markus, Jozsef, Mano, Heinrich, Karolina, Lipot, Rosa Rachel, Katherine, Anna and Ludwig.

I imagine most of them had kids too, but I only knew of Karolina’s. She married Lipot Gartenzaum, and they produced Arnold (who emigrated to the USA), Jozsef, Izabella, Aranka, twins Stefanie and Sandor, Gyula (who married someone named Violet and went to New York) and Paulina. No doubt some of them had kids as well.

Then there’s Great-Uncle Samuel’s siblings, Roza and Mark Moritz. Everyone in this gang, of this age group, was born in Slovakia but died in Budapest. All the next generation who were born in Budapest stayed there, with a few rare exceptions who skedaddled to New York.

Roza Deutsch married Wilhelm Klein, and they had Julius, Karolina and Max.

Mark Moritz married Katherina Zeisler, and they had Poor Old Johanna, Jozsef and Helena.

Poor Old Johanna married Samuel Szekacs, and they had kids too – Gyula turned Julius, the three-times convicted forger, Karoly the non-slandering, never-convicted news editor, and relatively unknown Max:

Julius married Amalia Weltsch, and they had Stephen Shelton-not-Szekacs, who died in Florida in 1991. Whenever someone strays into my lifetime, my heart skips a beat.

Karoly married Julia Pollak, didn’t survive the Second World War, and is buried in Budapest.

Max married Bertha Rotter.

Poor Old Johanna’s brother Jozsef married Rosa Konig. They had children: Philip Feital died as an infant. Salamon emigrated to New York, and sent for his wife Rezi in 1935, just in time to escape the war. They had kids too: Olga, Julius, Bernard, Joseph and Norbert.

Perhaps you’ll agree that’s a ridiculous number of cousins. Our Deutsches were out of control. I can imagine GGM Johanna rolling her eyes, muttering, “Those Deutsches were trouble, why did Fani ever marry him?” The younger “Poor Old” Johanna was in court every other year, with one son or the other.





Book publishers, red herrings, more flodni cake


GGM Johanna Nathan’s other sister was Lena Nathan. Lena was short for Magdalena. This Lena led us on a merry chase, and an embarrassing one. We had several genealogy sites contribute, aid and abet in our search for her. She was the critical missing link in the chain. It looked like our Lena was connected to the Kner family, a respected book-publishing dynasty. Possibly.

I’d found the Kner granddaughter who was the historian for her famously bookish family. I asked to compare notes because there was a chance we were distant cousins. She kindly invited me to visit. Beforehand, I gathered documents, but couldn’t find the vital one needed to show our Lena Nathan and theirs were the same. I was sure I’d checked every step, but I missed one, it pained me to see.

This is a reminder to double- and triple-check one’s sources before drawing a conclusion. Also, let this be a specific warning to those on “let’s share everything” style genealogy sites. What the My Heritage site calls a “smart match” may not be smart. It may be wrong, entirely undocumented and, in fact, totally stupid. I thought if they sent you a “match” that it was true. Silly me. They insist that if two people put the same thing on their two trees, it must be true. I wish I’d read that fine print. I had no idea they were that slack. So, when I was sent news of several overlapping trees sharing my GG-Aunt Lena, I assumed notice was sent because it was true. Wrong.

There was indeed a Lena (Magdalena) Nathan in Budapest then who married a Mr Steckelmacher and had a granddaughter Etelka Kulka. Etelka married Imre Kner of the highly respected publishing family. The story of their company was inspiring. They didn’t just publish books, they served their nation’s finest literature, and were the preferred publisher for many celebrated writers of those years. They were philanthropists too. I was proud of the potential link, even smug.

Was our Lena their Lena? I wrote to the tree-tenders concerned but only heard back from one. He didn’t know. It was just a guess. He did not check. He just slung any old Lena onto his tree. No documentation. This was their “smart match”. There could have been two Lenas. Great. A large structure had been built on this see-saw, all about to crash, as I arranged to meet two different groups of alleged cousins.

I met the first branch (or two) of this literary tree at their summer house near a lake. We enjoyed poring over photos – theirs and mine – and tried in vain to find a common link. But we had bowls of fresh apricots from their tree, we went for a swim, and I played with their grandchildren. I gave her a scan of her grandparents’ marriage certificate (public domain, but somehow she missed it), which she was very happy to receive. I especially loved her story of Grandmother Etelka, who was a piano student of Bela Bartok. She helped him transcribe some of those folk songs he collected. I was thrilled, and she could see that. There was a kindly, generous flow of information, none of it proving any of our main questions.

Visiting the other branch started like the old Telephone or Chinese Whispers game, in which a message was whispered by one person to the next, until it was absurdly different by the end. My scenario became confused right before that second visit: I suddenly found the public obituary notice for GGM Johanna Nathan, who died age seventy-two in 1900. It listed her two surviving sisters: Fani was listed as Mrs Sam Deutsch. The other was listed as Lena Nathan, our alleged link, but here was no married name. It’s unlikely an obituary would be so wrong as to omit a married woman’s surname. Our Lena was probably not married. If so, she did not marry the Steckelmacher who created the path to the Kner publishing dynasty. If so, we are not cousins.

I told my hosts, and they said to come anyway. It was wonderful to hear about their family publishing world, to see the ancestral flat full of attractive books. I had news of relatives they remembered. They were curious about my being new in Budapest. They were generous with the flodni. We talked all afternoon.

One asked, “What do you think of Hungarians?”

I said I was greatly enjoying meeting everyone, but I needed to learn their language. I was meeting expats mostly, or anyone who spoke English. I didn’t yet know many Hungarians, not very well.

“I think we are strange,” she replied thoughtfully.

After an enjoyable, interesting afternoon with these charming, funny people, I told them it was lovely to meet them, even if we were probably not cousins. The men congratulated my accuracy with facts. The women hugged me and said I could be a cousin anyway.





Effie May Waters, from Coffee, Bacon


Finally, we have a tale from somewhere in our mountain of Deutsches, of one Stephen Shelton. Stephen ended up in Florida and married Effie Mae Waters, who should have been a country and western singer, surely. Her nickname was Toddy Waters, and that’s even better. She was born in Coffee, Bacon, Georgia, which just about clinches it for the proposed band name Toddy Mae Waters and the Coffee Bacon Boys. I see a washtub bass at the back, and Effie May in a gingham, off-the-shoulder number, in the style of a young June Carter Cash.

Effie Mae arrived as a surprise in my inbox, presented as “wife of the second great-nephew of the husband of the third great-aunt”. What could be less clear than that? This: “great-grandmother’s uncle’s niece’s grandson’s wife”. It didn’t matter. I loved her name so I checked her out. Their birthplace, Coffee, Bacon, Georgia, is a real place. It’s the town of Coffee, in Bacon County, in the State of Georgia. If you can’t get a classic fried breakfast in a diner there from a gal named Rita, I don’t know where you can.

Effie Mae was married before she met our guy. She and Hubby One, Robert Gauzens, tied the knot in 1940 when she was eighteen. He was from a preposterously enormous family, tenant farmers with about twelve kids each, all born and raised, lived and died in rural Georgia. Many are buried in the Ten Mile Church Cemetery in Alma, Bacon County.

Toddy and Robert were married for twenty-eight years, and divorced in 1968 when she was forty-six. They had three children, who went on to have plenty of their own, and some of those had kids too, so the Gauzens marched on, presumably in their dozens if not hundreds.

Later in life, Effie Mae married our Stephen Shelton in 1982. She was sixty and he was sixty-seven. They were married in Palm Beach, Florida – very nice for the girl from Coffee, Bacon. Off the top of my head, I could not exactly remember who Stephen Shelton was. He sounded like yet another of our name-changers. I had to look him up. Yes, Stephen was born in Budapest as Istvan Szekacs the Unpronounceable, son of Gyula. That name Gyula rang a bell too – yes, he was our jailbird, the three-time forger, son of Poor Old Johanna. Later, in the USA, Gyula changed his name to Julius.

Back in Hungary, his first stay in the prison system was a few weeks. The second time was for a few months, and then it may have been a couple of years for the third and, we hope, final time.

Gyula became Julius in 1940 when he and wife Amalia emigrated to the USA. They were fifty-seven and fifty, escaping Fascists and Nazis just in time. But tired old Julius didn’t survive for long, and died the year he arrived. Amalia got citizenship and lived a nice long life in Florida near son Stephen, who did much the same, eventually marrying Effie May in his silver years.

Stephen was in the US Navy between 1943 and 1946, and was buried with veteran’s honours. He enjoyed a long career as an engineer and doesn’t seem to have ever retired, working right to the end. He died age seventy-six in 1991. She spent her widowed years with her daughter in Michigan, and died there in 2010, age eighty-seven.

So, Stephen Shelton, born Istvan Szekacs, immigrant son of a convicted Hungarian forger, did admirably well, and made a good life in a warm climate. Respect and shalom, y’ all – we got Georgia in the tree now.





CHAPTER XXXII Jewish Miscellany Tour



I made my umpteenth visit to the Land of the Grumpies. This has many representatives, the world over. Archivists and office workers come in all flavours. Grumpy Hungarians have a style all their own. I went with Bence (BEN-tzey) to the Community Centre of the Jewish Community of Budapest. He was the generous husband of a niece of a friend, who also had things to look up. His wife Zsofia had gone happily mad with genealogy, like I had. As we waited, she texted him more requests, minute by minute. She had been into genealogy for about five years, enthusiastically. Would he use the word obsessive? He immediately smiled and answered yes.

I’d never been here. It was translated as Rituals or Ceremonial Department. They had complementary information to that of the Chevra Kadisha (Burial Society, neolog), separate but nearby. Before we went in, Bence checked if I was religious or observant. I said not at all. He was. He wore the traditional cap, the kipa or yarmulke. He thought perhaps I should keep my info under my hat, for now. Some people here could be strict or overly protective. Even grumpy.

Today, however, the lady was kindly and helpful. She dug through huge tomes and held things while he photographed them. Then he texted each bit of news to his wife, who reportedly danced around their kitchen, bless her. Despite Mrs Kindly’s best efforts, I had no luck, but the dancing wife was worth it.

Bence teaches English and Spanish. His English was perfect. I suspect his Hebrew was too. He also teaches Hungarian and was learning another new language on top. I envy people like this.

Next we went up to the Chevra Kadisha, where I had been before with mixed results. There were two staff: the fair-haired reluctant one with some English and the dark-haired generous one with no English. Bence found quite a few things here too. Each time he texted another photo to his wife, there was more jubilation.

They found something for me: the burial record of Klara Spitzer (one of GGM Sarolta’s nieces), which I was allowed to photograph. This was the first time they’d allowed that. Other times, they held the notebook away, asked what my question was, answered that question, and furtively put the book back. This time I got close-ups, and the writing was clear. I was struck by the name on the bottom line: the person who arranged and paid for the burial. Here it was a Mrs … looked like Maliczki. That sort of rang a bell, but I had to check later. All-in-all, Bence had quite a boat full of fish, and I had one good humdinger, so it was a good day’s fishing.

On the walk back, he asked if I wanted to see his shul, meaning Saturday morning temple prayer service. I’d visited synagogues like a tourist in a museum, but never for real, so I accepted. I told him it would be a first for me and I knew next to nothing. Mine was a tangled mixed-blood family, I explained, and this particular branch was an extra tangled last-minute discovery. It was new territory. He understood. None of that mattered.





The cool shul


He described a place where all guests were welcome. Once, he recalled with a smile, across the back bench there was a funny combination of a Jewish man who became a Catholic priest, an observant Jewish man big in the LGBT community, and another very observant Jewish man who was a leather-clad biker, and they had a jolly old time together. That made it worth a visit, plus it was easy walking distance to the VIII. We arranged to meet the following morning.

I met Bence and friends at a familiar main corner where I got the good old 4-6 tram on the main street, or sometimes the rickety old tram to the cemetery on a side street – the slow bumpy tram that crawled along and stopped at every bush, as they said around here, with heavily laden local shoppers (cheap Chinese market en route) and few, if any, tourists. At first, I knew this corner as Nep-Something Diagonal street, later as Nepszinhaz, and by the end of the trip, I knew that meant “People’s Theatre”. Here, by Burger King, I met Bence, who was there with Rabbi Hurwitz and family, a large and lively bunch, full of chatter and joking; it was a fun walk. He stopped to note a particular hot chilli sauce, kosher, in a small shop window. This was hard to find, he smiled, glad for the discovery. I knew it, a famous Chinese brand I liked. And kosher, who knew?

Before, I had assumed Bence meant one of the big synagogues. Quite the opposite, it was a small prayer room in an apartment. This particular one was Orthodox, and I was instructed not to try to shake hands with or touch the rabbi. Long ago in Budapest, there were about twenty such home prayer rooms, but now this was one of only a few left. It’s been open for many decades. In fact, even during the Second World War, it only shut for a couple of weeks. Through a small door across a small courtyard, one entered a small reception area, which led to a slightly larger living room that turned into a dining room with kitchen, while to the other side was the prayer room, divided in two with a lacy curtain to separate men and women.

Rabbi Hurwitz was warm, friendly and chatty, and had a classic “Dad” sense of humour, with a river of groaner jokes and painful puns. There might have been about thirty or more people there that day, mostly male, about half of them dressed in the strict Orthodox way, and the rest in a modern assortment. There was a Romanian woman working for the EU and doing Jewish Studies at college. There was the teenage daughter of the rabbi, confidently in charge of her many siblings, and there was also his tired yet smiling wife. There was me too, and we were joined by a punky woman with dreadlocks and her punky teenage son.

I like a relaxed, warm atmosphere and this had that. I also appreciate a format where prayers are prayed in one room, while talkers can talk in another. This is an excellent thing in many traditions. The rabbi’s daughter did quite a few prayer stints in her chair behind the curtain, bobbing and chanting away with the gang, occasionally popping over to where we were gossiping and preparing food.

My highlight was meeting an older man who sat with Bence and poured forth stories about being a kid during the war. Bence deftly translated key turns in the story. This man was only eleven in 1945. He joked darkly about his sister’s remark that only once in his life was he a good boy. During the war, he ran all over the city at night, secretly, gathering food, fake IDs and firewood, being responsible for the family’s survival. He did not sound like a bad boy, but an amazing one. I’d known nothing like it.

In his family, only he and his grandmother were religious when he was young. His mother was a devout atheist and Communist, and his father didn’t care for any devotions. Almost all of them were killed in the war. He decided there was no god and no point in religion, so he stopped attending and swore he’d never step foot in a synagogue again. But now, he was in his nineties, and he wanted company. Even in his nineties, he had an amazingly sharp memory. And, in one of the many photo-montages on the wall, you could see photos of him as a teenager, dark and brooding.

One of the organisers, Gabor, said that in German schools, children learned all about the genocide that the Nazis and their collaborators committed. This helped a sort of cleansing of their national soul, but it was the opposite in Hungary. Some still say that German Nazis were cruel, and so were Russian Communists, but they said nothing of the huge numbers of Hungarian Fascists who turned on each other. They blamed outsiders.

Gabor said that after 1848, when Hungary was freer from the Habsburg Empire, laws restricting Jews were loosened, and it was one of the best places in Europe for Jews to exist safely. It was only later, after the Great War, that anti-Semitism rose so dangerously. I had a feeling that if I had any questions about this slice of history, here was someone I could ask.

The morning was full of smart conversation, and a lot of food. Then there was singing, featuring a communal running comedy about the tone-deaf, extra loud singing voice of their beloved rabbi. He reminded me of ex-rabbi and comic Jackie Mason, but way more exuberant. If anyone made a face, he sang louder still. Then everyone linked arms, and the singing really got animated. I was warned this would go on for hours. If I needed to go, now was the time.

Religious groups or rituals have never been my thing, but it was an enjoyable morning. It was nice to have a chance to meet people I’d never normally meet. Hearing that older man’s stories was a golden gift. On the walk home, we noticed a lot of police on the streets. Bence’s friend said a left-wing political group had been thrown out of their building nearby, and since then, the police presence had risen. Back to reality. I had a precious few days left and was trying to prioritise.





Salgotarjani Cemetery tour


During my final days in the city, my research came unravelled. However, some lucky timing befell me. While on the computer checking email, I saw by chance news of a tour of another cemetery, Salgotarjani, that very day – and there were places left. It would start at 2.30, and the time was then 2pm. I threw myself together, checked how to get there, and ran to the rickety tram that stops at every bush, which you catch at People’s Theatre street. I got there just as the tour started. No one near me spoke English, so I just followed along. It was beautiful. Weird, but beautiful.

The next three hours were exclusively in Hungarian. I hated to ask for anyone to spend extra time for me, and certainly didn’t want to steal any of the speaker’s time. I made it a visual tour and saved questions for the end. This guide was good, offering a non-stop flow of information and anecdotes, and held the group rapt for three hours. I could barely stay on my feet, it being a Bad Back Day, but I had my stick, thank goodness, plus a bottle of water. Hungary’s summer was hotter than I realised.

There were some extraordinary sculptures in the cemetery. Much was overgrown, but key areas were accessible, and the jungle was still beautiful. It was a splendid walk, with many of the paths strictly single file. That plus a language barrier made this like a walking meditation. I took photos, gazed along the names in hope of familiar ones, thought respectful thoughts, breathed in the leafy air, and took it as inspiration to do good things with whatever time was left in my life.

I noticed a swastika graffiti someone had tried to scrub off a headstone but a shadow remained. I was awfully tired by the end, but I was glad I came – and especially struck by the Ghetto memorial, an arched stone in its own circle. I left a pebble, and so did others. Afterwards, I cornered the guide, whose English was excellent. She explained it was a memorial for those who died in the Budapest Ghetto, but was not the site of a mass grave, as I was hoping. Only a few were buried here. I was still looking for signs of Frida, and others still unaccounted for. Those who clustered around the guide to listen were warm and sympathetic.

A short walk away, at the tram stop to head back into town, a huge gentle bear of a man remarked something to me, and then I confessed I understood no Hungarian. He was so sweetly shocked, squeezing my shoulder, and he checked with everyone at the tram stop, but no one could help (nor would their German). This did not stop sweet Mr Bear. On the tram, as it rattled and shook his pencil and my notebook, he scribbled down his name, Laszlo, and the names of some Facebook pages for Hungarian genealogy, which translate Hungarian into English. I joined, shared my top ten photos of that day, and brought questions to that group, which they patiently commented on. I was joining more and more groups, and learning more all the time. Even with the crazy Hungarian language, it’s amazing what a bit of networking can do.





Holocaust Memorial Centre, Budapest VIII


I’d been avoiding this place. Even people more intensely on this historical trail than me, and those on this trail all their lives, recommended I not go here. They said it is too dark, too awful, and there is nothing about those who survived. However, there is a library and research centre which aims to help people find out what happened to those not accounted for. So, I went. It was three short tram stops away.

The kindly man at reception listened to my story, and phoned upstairs. An even kindlier young woman came to meet me, and said yes, she could help me search. It was nearly closing time. I thought I’d be given an appointment for another day, but she did a few searches in the time we had. We had no luck. But she gave me her card, and encouraged me to get back to her with whatever information I had. I had mountains of information; that was the trouble. I didn’t know where to start. She insisted that I should try. Whatever I could send her, she would use to search. This was her job, and that of the two other young women beavering away at their computers.

This would push me to do all this time-consuming data entry, because it’s also what I needed to send to Yad Vashem, the World Holocaust Remembrance Centre in Israel that is the central repository of all such collected information. They want every little fact you’ve got. It would take time to type this up.

The remarkable thing about Yad Vashem is they not only look for documentation. They are said to be masters of personal networking, finding info through emailing, phone-calling and personal connections, which is why they have gathered so much information, and helped so many people find each other – or at least find out what happened.

But, still, my list was so very long. I started compiling all the stuff I found – dates, addresses, births, marriages, job descriptions, every bit from every record. I did this all one very long evening until the wee hours, and I was still not done with Good Old Uncle Rudy.

It was no longer just my “birthday year” project. This has become a mission for the rest of my life. Some of My People were forgotten, but now were remembered – or at least sought. Facts were hidden, but some would see light. This was a good cause, possibly my favourite ever.

So, research continued, and it always will.





CHAPTER XXXIII Miscellaneous Goodbyes



Bye-Bye Budapest Week had many sub-chapters.

The Budapest City Archives that once intimidated me was now friendly and routine. Today I was pleased to see the tall, thin bespectacled guy with the great English, whom I hadn’t seen in a while. He waved, and without any reminder, told his colleague my name and where my stuff was. I was a regular. The colleague brought out a larger-than-usual heap, mostly about our relations who went to court. Nice Mr Spectacles also found some things online, and. He looked at my long list, and then the big heap, a bit dolefully.

“We’re a big family,” I said by way of excuse, if not apology.

He noticed the Prisoner Records were on top, so I added, “And we were a very busy group, too.”

“Yes,” he nodded, smiling. “So are we, working very hard, for this busy family of yours.” He said it with irony. He was not one of the Grumpies.

Archives had two types, it seemed, Witties and Grumpies. Friday I spent the morning with a series of old lady Grumpies. On the local scene, they were infamous. They were grandmothers with sensible shoes kicked off, swollen feet in fuzzy slippers. Next to the computer was a tray of food and tea, with strudel crumbs all over the keyboard. You should feel lucky they even speak to you.

But at the City Archives, there were very few Grumpies – not in the front line, anyway. Today was Ironic Witty Guy Day, so I was in luck. Advice and materials were forthcoming. I was also returning things I’d been accumulating and studying for months. Today, on the cheerful theme of Going to Court, there were three contenders.

Cousin Karoly, newspaper editor who went to court seven times for libel but was acquitted every time, did a series of what you might call consumer advocate reports, naming which local companies got good, medium, or poor reviews from their customers. You can guess which companies filed complaints. The complainants mainly counter-argued this might lose them trade. Bad press like the truth might hamper their reputations and ability to secure loans. But, editor Karoly and team must have done their homework, because none of these complaints were upheld. I admired his record, but I pitied him for all the invoices his lawyers sent him. They were all in the folder too, as were the letters about his late payments – and it was a very tall stack of files.

His brother Gyula, by contrast, was convicted of forgery and served three sentences. Later he fled to the USA, where his son Stephen married Effie Mae Waters of Coffee, Bacon, Georgia. There were also details about civil rights defender Dr Marcel Hajdu. All in all, our Family in Court file contained a non-libelling newsman, a convicted forger, and a non-murderer who was wrongly accused. Two out of three was not a bad result.

As I returned materials for the last time, this year anyway, there was a cheerful interruption by two young male archivist colleagues, making an entrance while holding high a large gold-coloured trophy. Several clerks took turns holding it aloft in glory. I stared.

“Football tournament,” one exclaimed. “We are the champions!”

I applauded. How excellent, the archive boys were also leading athletes in their league, whatever their league might be. Certainly none of them looked like athletes. They looked pale and bookish. I like people with hidden passions. I will miss this place. It was only until next year, I hoped, or rather, I intended, and that blossomed into a vow: I will return.





CHAPTER XXXIV Spa Day



My eyes ached, my brain ached, everything ached – happily but strongly, after non-stop reading of documents and computer screens, every day and all day, for five months. Finally, I did something about this. I took all electronics and locked them away. I took all paperwork and books and threw some scarves over them, to prevent all related thoughts.

What was on the list of things I wanted to see or do? A few museums – no, vetoed! That involved the brain, the eyes and reading. The only contender was something Hungary is rightly loved for: hot mineral springs turned into thermal baths and spas. There were quite a few in the city, and I hadn’t been to one yet. I chose the nearest and the biggest, Szechenyi, a quick bus ride away.

The first thing you notice is the gargantuan, gorgeous golden building in a vast ring the size of a stadium. It surrounds three big outdoor pools, and contains about twenty smaller indoor pools, all with different temperatures, styles and features. I did everything that involved warmth or heat, skipping all cold or even cool plunge pools because I hate that – and also my heart might stop. It could be a mercifully quick way to die, but I was not ready for that yet.

There was a massive list of treatments such as massage, physiotherapy, pedicures, and everything imaginable in between, all of which I skipped because I was feeling great, merely worn out. I only spend money on those sorts of things when I am in dire need, or if an achy back is just unreachable.

I tried nearly every pool. All three outdoor pools were at different temperatures. Signs told you the water and air temperatures of the moment. The lap pool was cool, the lazing pool warmer, and the really lazy pool warmer still, with great jets of water thundering out of statuesque hoses, while people took turns getting pounded by them. They were so strong they shot me forward like a pellet gun. It was glorious.

Also fun were a couple of merry-go-round circular pools, where powerful jets slung you about with no swimming required. It combined laziness and exhilaration. Later in the day, when things got crowded, it had the added feature of bashing and smashing you against nearly naked strangers. I went in the morning. To each their own.

I tried all three saunas. The dry one was not all that hot, because too many thoughtless people came and went – and had never been taught how to shut a door. The steam room was iconic, in that you could scarcely see anyone except as hazy, dim blobs, and also I couldn’t breathe properly. My absolute favourite was the aroma room. This was the hottest thing on offer, and the emptiest, and I loved it. It boasted a range of 40–50°C (100–120°F). A warning sign picture suggested flipflops would melt. It was heavenly and so unpopular that the heat had built up fantastically behind closed doors, especially on the top shelf where you couldn’t possibly lean against the wall for fear of scorch marks. All muscle knots from a lifetime melted in minutes. This is why I love the tropics. What better relaxant than warmth?

Everywhere, you were surrounded by gorgeous architecture, tumbling with statuary, figures and gargoyles, all looming in a great ring, with an interior network of domed corridors and nooks. Unlike other baths I have known, this had no stink of sulphur or anything else. It was impeccably clean. The water must have been mineral rich, since you floated whether trying to or not. Limbs popped up to the surface of their own accord. I tend to sink like a stone, so this was a delight. Plus, my skin felt silken afterwards, which must be healthy. It was not the Dead Sea, but enjoyably close.

It was not difficult in the least to spend the entire morning and much of the afternoon there. I wandered from pool to pool, wishing everyone could enjoy something like this. Budapest could have harsh winters, so if you got fed up, something like this was the perfect answer.

Some cameo appearances of the day:

Three Japanese students, sporting huge swaths of tattoos, were soaking wet and shivering childishly in the fresh wind. They can endure tattoos but not a cool breeze? Pansies.

In one warm pool, a happy, sleepy grandma was held like a baby by her granddaughter, bobbing gently. The oversexed and/or romantic couples seemed embarrassed. Ironic, how they fondled each other but recoiled from Gran and Girly. Fooey on them. Others of us smiled. They were just so sweet.

By early afternoon, I was glad I’d arrived in the morning, as I had nearly had my fill. It was now packed. There were very few chairs left. There were plaintive signs in four languages (Hungarian, English, Russian and German) asking you not to claim empty deckchairs all day. This had no effect. The place was full of empty chairs with possessive towels claiming territory, with scores of us wandering about, seeking a spot to perch, even just for a minute. It was plain animal territoriality in action.

A chubby, pretty young woman was lying on the ground, resting her head on a water bottle, eyeing some awkward geeky boys nearby. She asked for their sun cream, put a bit on her lips, and lay back down. Soon she asked for more. The poor guy mumbled he did not have much, she pouted, he groaned and handed it over. She was right next to a group of girls with four big tubes of sun cream, but Miss Chubby did not ask them. I wonder why. She did not flirt or even talk to Nerd-boys. She got her goods and left. Clever little parasite. I was glad to be invisible to her.

At first, as the crowds grew, I still could not pull myself away. Then the first of many groups of beery men started singing. I don’t really mean singing, but that purposefully terrible singalong shouting which is the trademark of British Idiot-Boys Abroad. Germans were close behind in second place. It was time to go home.

There were other thermal baths around the city, and now I felt obliged to try every single one of them. They’re alleged to have different advantages. One is the most beautiful, one has the fewest tourists, one has a nice view, others make a nice day trip out of town, and so on. Hungary has a whole world of these places. I may have to do more research, purely in the name of bringing information to the uninformed. If called upon to do this public service, it will be my pleasure to serve.





CHAPTER XXXV Hungarian Bar, Bye-Bye BP, 2017


What do I remember about that last day? It was a whirlwind. If I took notes, which I almost always do, I cannot find them, and it’s possible I wrote nothing down but just tried frantically to keep up with the day’s agenda. It began unusually early in the morning. The nice lady at the Hungarian Bar Association said she could see us before the usual working hours, to search for the Hajdus – Olga’s first husband’s family. Bleary and distracted, I got us lost on stupid detours, trying to find the massive, elegant edifice. Inside was the standard issue extreme opulence, thick carpets, lots of deep maroon and dignified cream and evergreen hues, enormous antique oil paintings of past elders and leaders, room after room of velvet chairs and vaulted ceilings, statuary and artworks.

The nice lady brought out a file which we perused, selecting what she’d later copy for us. There was nothing earth-shattering or even gossipy, just dull letters confirming office addresses, most of it almost boring. But the photos were wonderful to see, and there were self-written professional resumes by both Hajdu men, father and son, Marcel and Janos. That was a golden find.

There was only a blurry memory of the rush back to the flat to translate what we could, the rest to be sorted later, over the internet, from afar.

Marcel and son Janos were interesting people, and getting more interesting all the time. Here is the far-fetched but real re-cap:

1. Granddad had a sister named:

2. Lujza, whose daughter was:

3. Olga, who married a lawyer, a doctor, a lawyer, and whose first husband,

4. lawyer Marcel Hajdu was divorced with a son from the first marriage named:

5. Janos Hajdu, also a lawyer.

In addition to that, Janos was an Olympic fencer, whose claim to fame was that he helped bring this sport to Hungary. He competed in Amsterdam in the 1928 Olympics, in which the Hungarian team took ten gold medals, mostly in fencing, with one each in boxing and wrestling. They took thirteen silvers (mostly water polo, but also javelin, wrestling and swimming) and seven bronze (mostly fencing, plus one each in wrestling and swimming).

Getting Janos’s CV translated was a highlight. Although it was filed at the Bar, it revealed a lot about his real passion, fencing. The style was first person narrative:

I was born in Budapest in 1904. My father was a lawyer. My mother worked with the Hungarian Opera – she was a freelance singer. She is currently retired. We never had a fortune. In 1922, I graduated from high school. Then in 1928 I qualified as a lawyer. In 1933, I took an exam to be a judge. In 1925–26, I was in Paris, where I was practising languages. It was there I learned fencing. I was the one who brought this sport to Hungary, for the first time.

I have also worked as Chief Legal Advisor, to a company dealing with damages and compensation. In 1945, I worked for an actors’ organisation. From 1947 I was a national notary until 1953. In 1952, I worked as a criminal lawyer. After 1953 I quit. Also, I was a member of the Partisan Association. Before that, I was a member of the Hungarian Soviet Company. I am not a Communist Party member.

I have a very long fencing history. I won Hungarian championships. And, in the world championship, I was a member of the Hungarian national team. I am a first-class sportsman, and for three years I’ve been a team trainer. In 1947–48, I led this championship team on foreign tours. I am now a trainer to another team. I played a very important role in developing this sport here in Hungary. Besides the Hungarian language, I can handle French, German and English, both writing and speaking. I do translations of French technical documents for two companies, and I am part of the Hungarian Translating Office. Budapest, 17 June 1953.

Dr Marcel Hajdu also had a short biography on file at the Bar Association, where he worked for many years. He died age sixty-five. His last permanent address was Budapest VIII, Sandor street 46, 1st floor. However, he died in the VI, Szabolcs street 33 – a hospital.

His first wife was Ilona Kis, an opera singer, resident in district XI, Gellert Szallo. He was thirty-two when they married, she was nineteen, and it ended in divorce. Their only child was Janos. Marcel’s second wife was our very own Cousin Olga Neufeld, then of Budapest V, posh Vaci street 16.

I’d like to know how fifty-year-old divorced Marcel bagged a twenty-two-year-old wife. It was Olga’s first marriage of three, and his second of two. Ten years later they divorced. No children had appeared in all my researches for quite some time, until finally up popped Marcel and Olga’s son Tamas, born the same year as my mother.

After weeks of ambivalence, I had a gradual change of heart about Olga. I had her pegged as possibly an irresponsible money-hunter, but no, she was a mother. Tamas was fifteen when his dad Marcel died in 1936, so respect to them both for weathering that. Tamas was my second cousin, a new cousin on the tree, and someone else Unaccounted For. When I thought of Olga, her three marriages, and an impressive corset collection to rival all others, it was hard to remember she was Dad’s cousin. It’s hard to imagine a dialogue between such different types. She probably knew nothing of his existence, nor he of hers. Puritanical, strict Dad may not have approved of Olga and her three-divorce lifestyle. I pictured hands in pockets, eyes to the ground, shaking his head, scowling, while she plumped her corseted curves.

There was only one photo of Marcel in his file. It looked like his retirement portrait. He was white-haired, portly, calm, and dignified. A man with great authority and a large but quiet presence. The accompanying statement said he was born in Hungary in 1870, and qualified as a lawyer in 1901. He soon changed his name from Haberfeld to Hajdu, to sound more Hungarian and less Jewish. When he was retired and unwell, son Janos lived at the same address with him. Two years later, in 1936, he died, and Janos took over his law office at the Bar Association.

I recalled his gravestone’s touching thank you from the local community for all his help and contributions over the years. Janos was buried there with him. I didn’t find the grave of Janos’s mother Ilona the singer, who died in 1976 (another who got through the war). Nor did I find any last marker for Olga. Marcel’s will was short and very sweet: he had nothing, and he owed nothing to anyone. I wished I knew more about Marcel and Janos, and Olga and Tamas. I sensed lives well spent.

There were other titbits gleaned from our visit to the Bar. The reason we had several photos of Janos, and only one of his dad, was perhaps that Janos left the Bar and rejoined a few times in his long career for different reasons. Each time, he had to return his ID, and later – on rejoining – got a new one, all of which got plunked into this file. The Bar’s 1947 letter confirmed that Janos would be deleted from the register because he had quit. This fact would be published later officially in a newspaper. His lawyer’s ID card was to be handed in within three days. If not, the Bar Association could ask for the help of the police in retrieving it.

Later on his request, in the middle 1950s, the Bar confirmed that he had worked there from 1933 to 1947, and again from 1954 to 1955. They said he had impeccable behaviour as a lawyer and was awarded a golden diploma for his service, whatever that was. Strangely, he also asked to confirm he had worked there in 1928, but they did not. That was the same year he earned his law certificate, and was on the Olympic fencing team. Quite a busy and successful year for him. Maybe he only worked at the Bar briefly or part-time, and was stretching his CV as any twenty-something might?

The oddest item in his file was a sort of questionnaire from 28 February 1945. He was in his early forties then, and this was post-Nazi but Russian-held Budapest. It was a mere two weeks after the end of the Battle of Budapest, one of the deadliest battles in the war. Why were they conducting questionnaires? What intelligence-gathering was that really about? I had no idea, but what follows is the information he provided (with my comments).

Hajdu, Janos Ivan. Born 19 September 1904, in Budapest. A Hungarian citizen. Lives in Budapest VI, 1 Bentczur street, II, 2, house 1, floor 2, door 2 (which is more specific than usual). His law certificate was from Pazmany Science University, 1928. He earned (another?) degree in 1933. He worked at the Budapest Bar Association 1933–44. That year, his work there was cancelled due to the new Jewish laws limiting their numbers in each profession (yet again he handed in his ID card). The Bar Association next stated clearly he had committed no crimes. There were no previous complaints or problems.

Q: If there was a cancellation of his membership, how did he make a living?

A: He had no job.

Q: From 1938, did he do any military service? Or, “forced labour” for Jews?

A: Yes, he did forced labour, several times.

The final photo we had of him was when he was about fifty. It’s the photo in his final Bar Association lawyer’s identity card, which he handed in when quitting for good. In his letter, he seemed happy to quit. “1955, June 4. Dear sirs, I hereby declare I have a new job, and am not willing to work with the Bar Association any more. I am to be deleted from the register.”

So, starting in 1955, at about age fifty, he did a variety of work other than law, including a lot of translating with his four languages. He died in 1981, age seventy-seven, and it looked like he had no other family.



My final few hours in Budapest were odd and funny. I stored my luggage, and had all afternoon in my home hood, the VII – first to a favourite, Massolit bookshop café, for coffee and a snack, then to Ghetto Goulash for one last Hungarian style lunch (big), and generally to plan for next year. I’d stored a small bag of local maps and winter clothes at the flat of Mr C and Mr C, now they’d finally made it official and moved in together. I sold my printer to a student, for half what I paid, via Kevin the translator. Kata had a nice grocery top-up earlier. I made the rounds of preferred eateries, had my last chance at the weekend Sunday market, and the last jar of Mr Nice Guy’s hot chilli sauce. I’d already established a pattern of returning empty, clean jars, for a huge smile and nice discount. I was ready to see him next year. I kept talking about next year. Maybe I can’t, I said to everyone, but I’d love to, so I vowed to try.

I gazed down the long mountain range of events spanning the last half year, starting with Mom’s death last winter, and ending in Budapest’s summer, which had fleshed out the ancestral history of hundreds of names uncovered for the first time, traversing a century. But, I didn’t find living cousins, so this story would need a wistful, inconclusive ending. In any case, a large-scale chapter was closing.

What sights would I like to see next time?

Every single thermal spa in the area.

The House of Houdini, which sounded funny, and he was on my list of famous Hungarians.

The House of Terror, relevant especially to Rudy’s branch, but this kind of thing can be deeply upsetting, so I’ll need a time when I am strong of stomach.

The Hospital in the Rock, a nuclear bunker built in the war, which sounded interesting but I hate going into deep dark caves underground, so maybe that can wait.

The Big Museums (Fine Art, National Gallery, Ethnography) and others, which I will see one by one, on Free Museum (Revolution) Day.

Meet more living people. Make more living friends.



This brought to mind that online well-wisher who wrote to me at the start of this trip. He too found lots of history, no living relatives, but new friends, which drew him back year after year. That’s now what I hoped for too. I intended to go back. I intended to March Forth.





CHAPTER XXXVI Finding Cousin Andreas



I found him via a spelling mistake. On one of the many internet groups I joined, I saw Karesz’s reminder that a name with “Sz” pronounced like S is very likely Hungarian. I knew that. However, there was a certain two-plus-two I’d not yet added up. Most sites let you search for a name and will present you with anything close. My favourite version of this was Jewishgen.org, which gave you the options of Phonetically Like, Sounds Like, Starts With, Is Exactly, Fuzzy Match, Fuzzier March, Fuzziest Match. That always made me smile.

There was no such flexibility with the Hungaricana.hu site. If the original clerk made a spelling error, that document may be unfindable. One must do a separate search for each version of the spelling, so imagine all the variations of a name like Steckelmacher.

I’d searched for most of us, I thought, on Hungaricana, but hadn’t tried all possible spellings, which seemed infinite. Maybe when Andras left Hungary, he spelled his name not Weisz but Weiss. I tried it. I found no Andras Weisz, but I did find an Andreas Weiss. Was it him?

Whoever it was had written a series of articles about five years earlier for a magazine of local history, sponsored by the town council of Szombathely. That’s where Andras had grown up. I downloaded all four articles. All were in Hungarian. Before painstakingly copying each paragraph to one of those Comedy Approximation Translation sites, first I scanned everything for familiar names.

Aha! I saw GGM Sarolta Spitzer’s name (and an oil painting of her!), and GGF Lipot Kardos, their daughter Berta Kardos (my great-aunt!) and her husband -Joe Peto (dreamy photo with bushy moustache), both Peto girls: Jolan with husband Lajos the actor (stylish photo, cool clothes and slouch) and Lili, Andras/Andreas’s mother, in an elegant oil painting plus many sweet photos of her with second husband Dr Pal Windholtz, who happened to be a gifted cellist as well. It was amazing to see photos, of which we had so few.

I found a cousin!

His four articles were about early childhood (1930s), early teens (1940s), his time at Auschwitz (1944–45), and post-war Budapest from 1945 until his emigration in 1949 to Vienna, where he was then still living – or so we hoped.

One of the articles had this introduction: “Andras Weisz was born in Szombathely in 1929. He went to St Imre Street School and St Nicholas High School in Premontre. In 1944 he was deported because of his Jewish origin, and he was liberated in Dachau in April 1945. After returning home to Hungary, he graduated in Budapest in 1948 and then enrolled in ELTE (then Peter Pazmany University). In the spring of 1949, he fled to Austria via Slovakia. In 1972 he received a PhD from the Technical University of Vienna, teaching ergonomics. He retired in 1993.”

Eureka! This was him, without doubt. This was cousin Andras Weisz, now Andreas Weiss. If he were alive today, he’d be nearly eighty-nine. I was ecstatic he’d survived and had a long good life! I jumped all over the room, jubilantly crying out, “I knew it! I knew they didn’t get us all. I knew someone got through. Cousin Andreas got through!” Research took an exciting new turn.

This Andreas was an elderly gentleman five years ago, and now? Would this magazine know? I sent Karesz the link to the articles. His reply came back:

This is a great find! … He was the one whose birth certificate did not have any late note. I saw an interview with him before I met you. I just did not connect that this is the same person. He lives in Vienna and Spain (in the summer)! We should contact him very fast. Let me call the publisher!!

And so he did. The publisher told Andreas he had an American cousin looking for him. We were hoping he was still mentally alert. His answer – “Are you really sure?” – suggested he was, very much so. In fact, later that always made me smile because it was so astute. He was sharper than most people half his age.

Karesz wrote to him, in his native Hungarian:

Dear Andras! [Hungarians always start a letter with an exclamation point after the name]

I am Karoly Vandor, a Jewish genealogy researcher. After a long investigation we came to you. This letter is a translation into Hungarian, from English-speaking Eileen, the granddaughter of Jeno Kardos. Jeno Kardos is the brother of your grandmother, Berta Kardos Peto. In theory, you are cousins!

If you speak English, I’ll introduce you two, and you can talk things out. Eileen has been looking for family for a long time, we’ve been researching a lot, and we have many branches and sidebars. You were the last one we were looking for. I hope you are well. If you do not speak English, I’ll translate whatever you write back, and I will send that to Eileen!!

I sent all the documents proving every step from me to Dad, to Granddad Eugene, to Eugene’s sister Berta, to Berta’s daughter Lili, to Lili’s son Andreas, living in Vienna since 1949.

“You have a cousin,” said Karesz, “I am so glad.”

I wrote to Andreas quickly, and he replied quickly too. He wrote in German, copying in his daughter Vera. The email’s translation feature was surprisingly good. My first letter began:

Surprise greetings, cousin. Second cousin, to be exact: my granddad Jeno was a cousin of your mother Lili, and your Aunt Jolan. We have the same great-grandmother (my dad’s mother) – Sarolta Spitzer, wife of Lipot Kardos. Your grandmother Berta’s brother Jeno was my granddad. He’s the one who went to New York. I grew up in the USA, and for almost all my life, I knew nothing about our Hungarians. Granddad Jeno (called Eugene in the USA) said nothing about his old life. His son Alex, my dad, was the same. It’s only now I am digging.

I found a document saying you were liberated from Dachau, but I did not know what happened to you, after that. I’m so glad you’re enjoying a long life! I found your articles for Eletunk magazine, and was amazed to read about our family. I’d like to ask permission to quote those articles. I am writing a book about my ancestry, and would like to include your statements. Oh, I have so many questions, if you will allow it.

First, I’m advised to attach some documents, to prove I am really the Kardos I say I am. If you agree, please let me send some questions? Or get a Hungarian-speaker to phone you? Or, make a suggestion for what’s easy for you (even Skype maybe?)

Many thanks, cousin, and congratulations on a strong, good life.

(I attached a long list of questions, about our GGM Sarolta, his GM Berta, and especially about his mother Lili and his Aunt Jolan, and their separation.)

7 November 2017

Dear Eileen!

I am very glad you found me! Until now I never was aware of possessing even a small number of relatives anywhere, not even before my “Auschwitz experience”. I had a second cousin in Toronto, around 90, who does not communicate. We are related from the Peto side, but don’t ask me how.

Whatever I know of this family, I mainly know from my Aunt Jolan’s stories. After the loss of my mother, who was killed in Auschwitz, Jolan filled her position in my life. After I returned from there as a 16 year old, with no parents, I lived with her, and after that I was still under her care. Therefore whatever I know of the Kardos family I know from her.

Great-Grandmother Sarolta Kardos – Jolan always called her “Nagyi” [NADG-ee], a nickname a bit like Granny. Sarolta, after the death of her daughter Berta, was always angry with Jozsef Peto (the husband), because Sarolta thought Jozsef was responsible for the death of her daughter – as Berta died giving birth to Lili. Lili had the feeling that she was made responsible by her grandparents, for the death of their daughter. Thereafter the grandparents took Jolan to live with them in the city, while Lili lived with her father, Jozsef Peto (nicknamed Pepi or Pepy), in the country. (Strictly speaking, Lili did not live with her father. Jozsef took her back to his home area, where a farming couple raised her for him.) The two sisters both deeply suffered from the separation.

Jolan lived with the grandparents in the Sziv street place, and got a very good education in a boarding school in Dresden, Germany, while Lili stayed near her father in Fehervar.

Now, about Lili. She was born in 1898. She was very pretty and she knew that, too. She always looked younger by 5 years. She was raised out in the country, near Peto’s people. One of them had a successful deli (Lipot was in business with them.) Lili went to business school and graduated. In the Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919, Lili was 21, she was the secretary of a Communist bigwig. After the fall of the Communist dictatorship, she fled to Szombathely because she feared reprisals.

Lili fell in love in Szombathely first with an officer, but that story came to nothing. The officer, Laszlo Kuti, was in his forties, a general and prominent member of the Hungarian resistance against the German occupation. This was followed by a link to a Dr Pal Windholtz. They wanted to marry, but Pal’s mother said no to marrying a poor girl. So Lili married her boss, my father, the rich big businessman Oskar Weiss. She worked in his construction company as a secretary. When my father died, she was no longer poor, so she was allowed to marry Dr Pal, her true love. He was my stepfather, then more than my real father: he was the best father you could ever imagine. I was deported with him, and he died next to me on 25 April 1945 (on Lili’s birthday), four days before the liberation. He died of starvation. Lili was killed under unknown circumstances at Auschwitz. Those circumstances, how that happened, I never followed up. It would not change anything, and it may consume me, as too emotionally difficult.

I know very little about Pepi. He was a handsome man, and probably otherwise offered rather little. He was somehow involved in this family business, however, paid little attention to the agenda, but only cared about being in love with Berta. On the birth certificate of Lili, he stands as an employee of a credit ratings company.

This is enough for today. Your cousin Andreas (or Andras)

Soon, emails and photos were exchanged every day, also with his daughter Vera, who shared them with her two kids and grandson. Andreas continued:

…After 1946, during my stay in Budapest, I had a faint knowledge of the Kardos’s existence, but it was only “dark matter”. I had the feeling of a deep void between them and Jolan. I heard they received parcels from the US, so Jolan must have had some connection with them, but she never brought me together with them.

What else? One of the Kardoses who returned from the US lived in the same house with the famous Hungarian composer Leo Weiner. Jolan told an anecdote about him, in which she heard the US Kardos boy made a great career and became a Senator.

I am very glad to have found you at my youthful age of soon 89… I hope we are going to stay in touch – until then – With the best family regards –

Your cousin, Andreas

I replied:

You thought you had no family? Oh you have plenty. Surprise!

Question: may I have your permission to share this letter with my family in the USA? Some of them are very interested.

Question 2: I write a travel column every week, on the internet. May I have permission to tell them what’s in your letter? May I use quotes?

Now, about our new Senator, that really gave me a good laugh. My Uncle Ed (Eugene and Anna’s middle son) was a local councilman in a small town. I attach an article about that. But no, he did not go to Washington.

His reply:

Dear Love Eileen!

About the Senator, I am careful with family legends. About my father (Oskar), the family said he was a captain in the First World War, but in fact, he was a lieutenant.

From great-grandfather Lipot Kardos, it was said that he was Director General of the Italian-Hungarian Bank. You have to pull off two ranks with such legends.

About the USA Kardoses – of course, there was correspondence! After the Second World War, the US Kardos family sent packages to Budapest Relations! What I do not know is, with which Budapest Kardos was Jolan in contact? And why she has never brought me into contact with them?

I imagine this was probably my Aunt Fran, wife of sweet, funny, winking Uncle Albert (Eugene and Anna’s oldest son). If anyone kept in touch with the Hungarians, especially the Jewish ones, my guess is it was Fran, our only Jewish lady for miles. Wow, the concept of Fran and Jolan as pen-pals mightily shook both my imagination and my knees.

Andreas also gave his family’s angle on the myth of Eugene’s departure from Budapest. He confirmed what I understood from his article. First of all, from the American side of this story, family legend was consistent and clear that Granddad Eugene was notoriously silent about his life back in Budapest, that he was a nice guy but a weak fool for gambling, and he’d run away from some financial mess, some irresponsibility, some mistake, even a gambling debt, as a result of which he didn’t so much emigrate bravely, as he got shoved or maybe exiled, to New York.

Andreas’s view on this was covered in his second article:

My mother’s mother, Berta Kardos Peto, was born in Vienna, but the family was only there a few years, with her father (Lipot) working at a Hungarian bank. My mother’s sister, Jolan, my aunt, said that the family was a very distinguished family. This Kardos family must have been wealthy people, they had a four-storey building on Sziv street, Budapest. They had oil paintings, beautiful things.

But, on the Kardos side, there were two black sheep, some relatives of my mother or her mother Berta. They were cousins who played on the stock exchange before the First World War, lost a lot of money, and used the name of my great-grandmother (Sarolta). They had been cheated.

After that, it turned out, great-grandmother Sarolta paid off the fines, crushed the guilty, gave them a boat ticket and sent them to America. From that moment on, those two branches of this family never spoke. It was only several decades later communications resumed, in the late 1940s and also 1950s, difficult times in Hungary, when they suddenly became “Dear American Relatives”, from whom we wanted to receive packages.

This tallied with the US rumour-mill, at least in style and spirit, and it filled in some caustic detail. It was indeed our mutual GGM Sarolta Spitzer Kardos, with the house on Sziv street, full of “oil paintings, beautiful things”. I made a mental note to look into her getting that house from her mother, Johanna Nathan Spitzer, and I’d like to know more about Johanna’s two sisters. Did they get a house each too, or what? There was Fani Nathan Deutsch with her mountains of kids, and Lena Nathan the spinster. Eldest was Fani the Fertile, born 1819, then came a gap of nine years until our Johanna as middle child was born 1928, followed quickly by Lena in 1830. That research was for another day.

Returning to the Kardos boys getting chucked out of Budapest, it was Rudy and Eugene who went to New York in 1906, no one else. These were the black sheep of the story. Rudy, however, went back to Budapest. Maybe all was forgiven, since he and Lipot went into business again. Rudy was a banker after all, and remained one all his life. Over those years he set up various business partnerships with others, often with family. He went straight, in other words, and became dutiful.

GGF Lipot and co played the stock exchange like a roulette wheel. I saw numerous legal documents where Lipot set up businesses within the family, making contracts with son-in-law Arnold Stark, also a stockbroker; with son-in-law Joe Peto who worked with private detectives, for loan security; with son Rudy the banker; with brother-in-law Miksa Spitzer, another stockbroker and trader.

Clearly, Kardos men routinely kept business in the family, in each other’s combined names, and sometimes with the names of their womenfolk too. The difference with young Eugene and Rudy, it would appear, is that they played the stock market wrongly using their mother’s name and account and cash, probably fraudulently, blowing it all spectacularly, with fines to boot, and possible prosecution awaiting them. Sarolta’s reply was to plunk the scoundrels on the next boat for New York, which of course needed people like them. Family legend said Eugene’s parents were generous enough to help him set up a bar business, but that was the last time they propped him up. So, he wasn’t a pioneer. He didn’t jump. He was pushed.

These were our branch’s auspicious beginnings.





CHAPTER XXXVII Jolan and More Q&A


November 2017. “You can do what you want with what I write you. It has passed into your ownership,” wrote cousin Andreas. I was bowled over. I’d been worried I’d sent too many questions, and he would put my email address in the bin labelled “Pest”. How nice to be wrong. He had questions too. He only wished his English was better. It was very good but looked like an effort.

We turned our focus to Jolan, whose whole life until her marriage in the late 1920s had been spent with her grandparents Sarolta and Lipot Kardos. She did not even know she had a sister until she was almost a teenager. The sisters became friends as young adults until, in 1944, Lili, husband and son were all sent to Auschwitz. Only Andreas returned.

Meanwhile, in the city, Jolan had procured fake papers. “She’d managed to survive in Budapest, in a so-called ‘Swedish National House’, an only half-safe safehouse, but better than many places. And, in theory, Jews in ‘Swedish Houses’ were under the protection of the Swedish Embassy.” Jolan claimed Swedish connections, which Andreas doubted, but I thought the link was via Markus Kardos’s sister-in-law, Gabriella Jaut, who married the Chinese ambassador to Sweden, lived most of her life in Sweden, and later married a Swedish insurance mogul. At any rate, Jolan survived, and Andreas joined her after the war, in her little place on Barat street.

Andreas wrote:

I felt very close to Jolan, who filled my mother’s role, after the war… In Dachau, my stepfather and I often spoke of Jolan. He said, “Nothing will happen to her, she is clever and cautious, and if nothing else can be done, she will hide in the basement under the coal stored there, and survive.” She did survive.

Jolan was an academically qualified piano teacher, a piano professor in Vac, in a conservatory about 30 kilometres from Budapest. Due to discrimination laws against Jews at that time she lost that post, and lived in the 1930s only by doing private lessons. She had an approximately 35 square metre apartment that consisted, first, of a room perhaps three square metres, where a hot plate was placed, then a bathroom with maybe three square metres, and the rest was a living room, with a piano in the middle. We rolled out mats and slept with feet under the piano. Above the piano hung Sarolta’s oil painting that now hangs as one of my greatest treasures in my living room.

While she lived in the “Swedish National House” with the fake Swedish passport, which was probably from September 1944 to March 1945, other people moved into her apartment, a family of three who got bombed-out. Jolan returned and moved in with them, all in the one room. Then I joined them. Jolan urged me to stay, to encourage the family to leave, which they did, eventually.

After the war, Jolan gave private piano lessons, all the way to 1950 (I was no longer in Hungary), then finally got a job as a music professor in a conservatory. She was a great person, Jolan. She spoke little of her grandma Sarolta Kardos. She spoke little of her childhood. Her gran could not have been a very emotional person. I heard it in Jolan’s voice, when she spoke of Sarolta, there was respect, maybe not as much love. When I think of Sarolta, I see an elderly lady in front of me with stiff posture, not like the young woman on the oil painting. Even those notarised legal documents Eileen sent me reinforce this impression.

He was referring to the Gift, the document in which Grandma Sarolta spelled out that Jolan would inherit the apartment and contents, and Sarolta would pay for a matchmaker and dowry. That didn’t turn out as straightforward as it sounded.

Jolan and Lili had minimal contact for many years. Family forbade it. Their grandma died in 1935, and their dad died in 1926, so Jolan began joining Lili, Pal and Andreas during summer vacations at Lake Balaton. Contact became easier and better until Lili’s death in 1944, age forty-six.

I sent the above information to a new email group of about twenty relatives. The respondents were astounded and thrilled, and eager to hear more, as I was. Recently I learned that Jolan not only survived the war, she lived until 1980, age eighty-four. This floored and delighted me. I was in Budapest in 1977. Andreas sent me a photo of her in 1976. I bet I walked right past her, or sat next to her on the tram. In fact, I felt sure of it. I wish I’d known. I wish I’d carried her groceries, made her tea.

Andreas continued:

I now write about Jolan’s not unproblematic husband. I only know that “Boci” (his name was Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz) was an actor, one of the second category, a B-actor who never had a major role, but often played in the theatre or film as a character actor. (In theatre he did some writing and directing too.) He was wounded in the First World War as a soldier, and it caused constant pain. However, he got morphine and soon was an addict. Supposedly this was the reason he slipped into the extreme right-wing, militant anti-Semitic stock. Supposedly these people got him the drugs. Then, he was accused of having Jewish ancestors. He tried suicide, he survived.

Hungarian film websites said he had sixty-seven film credits in the l930s and 40s – not many characters with names, but perhaps with a few lines: a doctor, an innkeeper, a father snoring on the train. He was in the background of a few film posters, smirking behind the stars, twiddling a corny moustache.

The Hungarian websites Huszadikszazad.hu and Hangosfilm.hu feature biographies of Boocz, saying he strongly advocated cleansing Hungarian films of Jewish actors, even in the smallest roles, not even half or quarter Jews. For over a year, this was the principle of all film companies. No one said Lajos was part of the Arrow Cross, the most violent Fascist party at that time, but he was very close. Then, something unexpected came his way. He was “accused” of being Jewish, in 1942, which he was not. The evidence against him consisted of an unsubstantiated rumour and a faked anonymous report, but the Actors’ Chamber initiated proceedings against him anyway and fined him 2,000 pengo (a short-lived Hungarian currency).

Hangosfilm.hu went on: “He was deeply affected by the verdict. He completely retired. The stress on this otherwise weak-minded artist was very severe. He was completely broken. His old illness from the field of battle was aroused and he was desperate. He attempted suicide but was rescued. The capital city expressed sincere astonishment and deep concern about the self-poisoning of Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz… The general public wishes him a speedy recovery.”

All articles said he disappeared from the film and theatre world, then disappeared altogether, and his fate was unknown.

Cousin Andreas disagreed. He said it was perfectly well known. “All this still did not prevent him from escaping at the end of the war, with other extreme-right actors to Argentina.”

By the way, those biographies also said his first, if short, marriage was in 1918–19 to Iren Garay. His second, not much longer one, was to the Jewish Mary Hecht who divorced him in 1922. Our Jolan was third. She married him in 1927 and they were divorced by 1935. Jolan wasn’t always lucky, after all.



My favourite recent quote from Andreas:

It’s interesting to talk to you, but it will take me a while to internalize our relationship. A family growth after 89 years takes some getting used to. But we will succeed… You certainly know the jealousy of what an only child feels when he suddenly gets a brother or sister. The parents, who have been there for him alone, must now be shared with a newcomer. I do not feel the jealousy, but it is a strange feeling to suddenly share the portrait of “Nagyi” – she is your great-grandmother, but she is mine!

I replied that this made me smile, that she is really his, and my link is only the driest theory.

Our letters or video calls were daily, and news was shared with Vera and her gang, plus the USA gang. Then communications were interrupted for a while: Andreas had an injury, then his (second) wife Agi had surgery and a difficult recovery, then my mother died. We all agreed to get back in touch, when things settled. Meanwhile, I flew towards Mom’s memorial service.

Later, we made plans for me to return to Budapest, and then to March Forth to them, in Vienna.





CHAPTER XXXVIII Vera and Other Cousins


I’ve spoken to many people who lost large numbers of ancestors in this massacre or that, and most are resigned to what was probably true. They feel no need to search for proof. They’d never waste time on something so painfully unlikely as survival. However, it was simple odds that if we had dozens of cousins, even hundreds of distant cousins, in Budapest during the Second World War, a few may have survived. I had to know I’d tried my best to search for them.

On 14 November 2017, I received an email from Vera:

Eileen!

I read your emails with great interest. Quite amazed how big and widespread this family is. I grew up with the strong feeling that hardly anyone survived. I was born in a displaced persons’ camp in 1952. I had a father, a mother, and otherwise nobody. Then when I was six years old, I got to know Jolan, my great-aunt. That was my whole family. Aunts, uncles, cousins, other grandparents? All in a big black hole named Holocaust.

Surprisingly, I had a good life so far. Much like you I’ve done a variety of jobs. Waitress, nurse, accountant, historian and the last twenty years a journalist, on Vienna TV and radio.

In memory of all the Jewish women who had to bear the name of Sara during the Nazi period, I named my first daughter Sara. My second daughter’s name is Ruth, for Ruth in the Bible. Her son is now ten years old, named Nuri. A Hebrew name, my light, my grandson.

About Jolan: as I said, I was twelve and Jolan about seventy. A large lean figure. Grey-haired, usually dressed in a garment rather simple yet very elegant. Especially her movements and language. In her hand was usually a cigarette holder. She was curious about me and very interested. Her Budapest apartment was quite small. A room where you could hardly move, because there was a grand piano. The room dominating and imposing. Bookcases with glass doors. We slept on a pull-out mattress, with our feet under the piano. I went to stay with her two to three times a year, mostly alone. Hungary back then was behind the Iron Curtain, and she couldn’t get an exit visa, but for me in Austria, it was easy to go there. It was my first self-sufficiency, first independent travel. And Jolan was a great destination.

She told of how luxurious it was, where they grew up. With velvet and silk, servants and genuine education. They were enlightened Jews, not religious. Goethe, Schiller, Heine, sacred. Jolan was sent to finishing school in Germany because she discovered her love for the piano. Her father (Jozsef Peto) could be described as elegant and polite, an interesting man. However, she did not often see him, only every few weeks.

After the death of Berta, Berta’s parents took two-year-old Jolan to raise. The newborn Lili was not wanted. For Sarolta, baby Lili was to blame for Berta’s death, and she was as despised as Peto was.

This story has fascinated me:

For the wedding they (Lipot and Sarolta) gave Berta a small house. There was an apartment and a business, I believe a general goods shop. But Peto reportedly was not concerned with business, but rather writing poems. So while he made love poetry to his wife upstairs, the employees looted the shop below, and debts piled up. When Berta died, there was nothing more. Therefore, the Kardoses took little Jolan (and banished Peto and newborn Lili). Lili came as a foster child to farmers in the country. Jolan met her sister Lili eleven years later, when she was thirteen.

Until then, the girls knew nothing about each other. Jolan was shocked when they met for the first time. Her father invited her on a trip. On the train he told her about Lili. She was stunned. The revered father was not hers alone. Sharing was not the usual for the pampered banker’s granddaughter. When she saw Lili the shock was total. This was truly her sister!

It took years for the sisters to get along. Later it was an intimate love. Jolan went to Dresden to boarding school, dreamed of being a concert pianist. Then came the First World War. Like so many Jews, their grandparents invested a lot of money into the victory of the Habsburg monarchy and lost everything. Grandfather Lipot died and Jolan felt responsible for her grandmother. She was in love with a talented pianist but had no money. She was a piano teacher, but just barely, so she entered into a marriage of convenience, which seemed enough.

Jolan’s husband, Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz, was a film star, had a swanky apartment. But soon it was all gone. The chairs were taken from under her behind, she said later. Lajos was a drug addict, and they divorced: a divorced woman was then a scandal. Meanwhile, Lili began work as a secretary for the Communists and eventually landed a well-off older builder, Weisz. No love match. But at least they got a house and a child.

Jolan and Lili were fun-loving people who loved singing, and nature, and her son was well-loved. When Lili was widowed, she went back to an old love, a doctor. (She should have waited a year, by custom, but remarried in only six months, which was scandalous then and gave her a bad reputation.) Dr Pal was a wonderful stepfather for my father. Jolan, however, remained in Budapest alone. There she survived.

The German Fascists shared Hungary after invading in several sectors in order to deport the Jews to Auschwitz. From the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, they learned that collection Ghettos had to be cleared as quickly as possible so that there was no time to organise resistance. And they also had not enough trains to complete their killing work at a stroke. They needed the trains for the return of their soldiers from the Soviet Union.

Eichmann’s work was to develop a meticulous schedule. In every train, three to four hundred Jews were fitted and the trains rolled sector by sector. Within two months, 440,000 Jews were sent to Auschwitz (many say more). For the Szombathely community, a train was enough. Budapest no longer managed. There they had Jews individually taken from their homes brought to the Danube and shot or rounded up and sent on death marches. But, as I said, individually retrieved.

After the war, Jolan lived in her tiny apartment. My father was able to return to his studies, and Jolan became a teacher – an enthusiastic teacher. In the working-class neighbourhood, she told me proudly, she was teaching the children the beauty of Beethoven and toilet paper.

She wanted to build a new world, a just and peaceful one. But the party did not want to. That my father did not trust the Communists and fled, she understood, but she wanted the right path to socialism. I was in my youth Maoist and we had many debates. She was infinitely important to me.

It is a pleasurable thought we have a lot of family in the wide world, after all. Your interest in this story moved me and I would be very happy to get to know you personally.

With regards, Vera

After that letter, there followed an enthusiastic flurry of messages to do with my coming back to Budapest the following spring, and coming to see them in Vienna.

Dear Eileen!

It’s fine that you’re coming. I can even imagine us really talking to each other, because I understand some English when it is spoken slowly, and over time, I may even say something.

My condolences on the death of your mother. My mother died fourteen years ago and I often think of her. And I’ve learned that the saying “time heals all wounds” is somehow true. Because the longer she is dead, the younger she is in my memory. The heavy last time of pain and injury, which was so difficult for me in the beginning, is slowly but surely disappearing.

My partner Andi speaks very good English, my daughters halfway, my grandson unfortunately not yet. So there is a lot of family which is already happy to meet you. I live in the city centre, and I know Vienna very well. I’d like to show you my city.

See you soon, all love, Vera

And after that, came this:

Eileen,

You can stay as long as you want. So you can imagine what to expect, I will describe my life a little. Andi speaks good English, is about two metres tall and a bicycle-freak. Bikes are his job, his hobby, his passion. He’s already cycled halfway around the world, he repairs and builds bikes and he has shares in a bike shop, and there is bike stuff all over the flat, especially in the guest room for you.

The cat is Logo, is now nine months old, looks very sweet but can be very combative.

Grandson Nuri dominates my days. His mother works, so weekday afternoons I go there and cook, etc. It’s ten minutes by bike. I speak French and Hungarian. I did not learn English because I thought it was the language of the imperialists, but I only hurt myself. As a child I was a Zionist, then 68, Maoist, trade unionist. In 1990, I wrote a brochure about how Hungarian Jews migrated to Lower Austria, a work the Simon Wiesenthal Centre has praised as an important piece of the puzzle on the history of the Holocaust. But I did not go on, I ultimately became a local journalist. I read a lot, there are book mountains wherever you look at home.

So, I hope now you can imagine a little more of what to expect in Vienna.

Greetings and see you soon!!!

There was a lot up in the air. No one knew when Agi (Andreas’s wife) would be able to come home from hospital, and yet a big Sunday gathering was planned. Also, Andreas insisted I stay a week or two, but he was not the one hosting me. Vera was – the cousin nearest my age.

Her advice was, “If you feel comfortable with me and want to stay longer, you naturally get a key and can move independently. I have a little free time in the morning. Then later morning I leave and around 7pm I’m back home. My father and his wife I see about twice a week. It is located approximately one hour away from me.”

It was simply a matter at that point of waiting for the chance to, guess what? March Forth!





CHAPTER XXXIX Vienna, March 2018



I returned to Europe, and marched forth on arrival in high spirits. As the plane landed in Budapest and eventually slowed to safety, the first surprising thoughts were, “Your life is your own now. Research this story. Dad’s long gone; Mom won’t care. Do it. Get the story.”

Those first few days were fuzzy with headachy, nauseated jet-lag in a freak cold snap, way below freezing with vicious winds, for which I was ill-prepared. A late-evening arrival meant not much to eat. I struggled upwind on ice to the nearest Anyplace With Food. Soon I was consuming cheap salami sandwiches and vodka, with TV’s Little Britain dubbed into German and South Park dubbed into Hungarian. The weirdness felt appropriate on a recovery day.

In the usual pattern of long-haul flights, my brain arrived a few days later, so I staggered blindly through the initial tasks of settling in. The kitchen was stocked, monthly travel pass purchased, my few and new but lovely pals contacted. Kata was around, and so was Kevin Translator. Mr C & Mr C had got married since I was last here, with Kata translating at the ceremony, and the photos were sweet. Karesz was here but already overbooked and busy.

I stayed in the same room as last year. As gritty as this area was, it was familiar, which made re-entry easy. That week I’d gladly see, one by one, my old haunts and eateries, and establish new rounds (hummus, Hungarian, vegan, Indian). Only the supermarket had rearranged things, like they do, which made me smile. Everything made me smile, these days. Just being alive made me smile. The dream come true of being back here made me smile all over, safe in the knowledge that sarcasm was never far away.

The best task was purchasing a train ticket to go to Vienna on Saturday to meet the Long-Lost Cousins for the first time. We were all getting excited. However, Agi was still in hospital and it was unclear when she’d come home. For months, Andreas wrote and joked I should hurry and visit, because he was old. I replied they must hang on until I got there. It became a running gag, which later added a pang of reality. We decided I should arrive the next weekend, come what may, and I got a ticket with a swoon.





Tuesday 6 March 2018


I retrieved the bag I left with Mr C and Mr C. I was surprised and pleased to hear how generous and fair Hungarian law was on same-sex partnerships. This was called a Life Partnership, and was in every way like a traditional marriage, with only two exceptions. They cannot adopt a child, and one person cannot take the surname of the other.

All concerned sweetly agreed it felt like I’d never left. It felt as if I lived across town but we’d all been busy for a while. I was only away for eight months. I knew which bus to take without thinking. I felt warm and glorious going home to a new “home away from home”.

The next day I was set to go to the Budapest City Archives, but they were closed for three weeks. This was disappointing, and changed the month’s agenda substantially. This weekend, anyway, I’d be away in Vienna. Then I’d focus on other archives, when not with actual living beings.





Saturday 10 March 2018


It was a nervous sort of train journey, going to meet these total strangers. It was weird, wonderful, strange and curious. Andreas and I had exchanged dozens of emails, and had spoken via the internet. Vera, less sure of her English, sent long letters that survived translation beautifully. Despite feeling she could not function much at all in English (she said not to phone; she’d just stammer), she would be meeting me at the station. It was an easy train journey, towards the end of which I was approached by a smiling man in a smart uniform asking things in perfect English. Where did I travel from? Budapest. How did I get to that train station? Budapest metro. When I arrive in Vienna, will I continue my journey by underground, or bus, or what…? I almost said “Friends will meet me” out of habit, but said, “Family will meet me”, and then my throat choked and my eyes misted.

Suddenly, there was Vera on the platform, smiling, short and stout, with sensible clothes and hair, already holding the cigarette and lighter she’d ignite the first allowable moment. She deftly steered me through their transport system (which was excellent), and soon I knew I was in the capable hands of someone who has hosted many a guest on their pull-out bed. After all, she’d been a psychiatric nurse, a mother and a journalist, so she could deal with anyone. I was soon fed, watered and made at home.





Sunday 11 March 2018


The clincher in comfort was a typical Sunday morning with newspapers all over the table, in between mugs and plates. She was in her underwear; he was in probably what he slept in. That’s when I could relax and appear at the table in pyjamas. She showed me where things were in the kitchen, and said if I helped myself, it would be a lot easier for her. So I did. It was a little place with three little rooms that clearly showed they’d been there a long time. There were books and bike things everywhere. It was in a tidy public housing block near the city centre, which demonstrated how smart Vienna was about its extensive public housing.

Vera and Andi have been partners for twenty-five years, in what the Germans call a “wild marriage” (co-habitation), which really made us laugh, as they pretended to pound their chests like apes. He was generous, kindly, gentle. Bread was baking. The cat was playing, although still terrified of me; however, I coaxed. This became the project of the visit, but I did not get very far. That would take several visits. At this point, we did not know there would be more visits. We promised to try three days, and I stayed for five.

It was a funny language challenge: Vera spoke German, also good French and a bit of English, whereas I remembered very little French and that was about it. This provided great comedy potential. I remembered maybe ten German words that Mom’s mother used, mostly to yell at us. “Raus! Mach schnell! Dummkopf!” (“Out! Make it fast! Dummy!” ) It was no more than we might have heard on TV’s Hogan’s Heroes (many Holocaust survivors among that cast, by the way, some playing Nazis). The elders spoke great English, I knew from Skype, but I also knew it drove Andreas crazy that it was not perfect.

After the relaxed morning came High Tea in the afternoon, at the home of Andreas and Agi, under the oil painting of our mutual GGM Sarolta Spitzer Kardos. Vera and Andi and I went, and met her two daughters: Ruth came with son Nuri, and Sara brought partner Alex. Everyone brought bags of goodies and flowers. The elders’ place was in a posh part of town, and filled with art, pretty rugs and textiles, and other gorgeous, breakable things.

The table was truly a thing of beauty. They brought out their best china, crystal and silver, and their best was very beautiful. There was champagne and wine and masses of different foods brought by everyone. There was no shortage of flowers. It was touching and splendid. Soon the talk loosened up. They were amazed to hear all about Grandma Berta’s other six siblings. We talked and talked. It was mind-blowing and wonderful.

I was honoured how Andreas, who never let anyone into his kitchen, made an exception this one time: his various womenfolk insisted they too must be part of the welcome.

A few people commented I looked a little like Jolan, which I did not see. Later we went into photo albums, and one picture took me aback sharply. There was something about the shape of her face and nose that was spookily like mine. I saw my nose. It was an eerie moment – that nose connection again. Plus, Jolan was a piano teacher, as I was. She had no kids, like me. She was a tough survivor. Hmm. DNA moves in mysterious ways, does it not?

Andreas could be described as a wizened man not much taller than me (short). He dressed coolly and stylishly, had sharp eyes and a precise, cool goatee. He spoke precisely too, and his intelligence was like a keen laser beam. I was glad he was close to my height because we progressed from an introductory, professional double cheek air-kiss to a full-on chummy hug by the end of that evening.

We had a plan. Monday, I’d spend the morning in a friendly interrogation of Vera about ancestral gossip. Then, while she went to help with her grandson, I’d visit Andreas for the afternoon. She loaded me up with groceries for them, since he did not want to leave Agi’s side. The home help would start soon, and that would make a huge difference.

It was a beautiful house, full of books, and plastered with original artwork that were mainly gifts from friends, fans and admirers. As a retired academic, he was still a bookworm. There was a lively caricature of his dad Oszkar Weisz, a huge bear of a man, architect and builder, holding a myriad of plans and blueprint scrolls. This was all the way up on the third floor, which was literally all books, with his computer in a corner near the wonderful oil painting of his mother Lili, by Louisa Wilhelm, a former student of Chagall and a leading artist in Israel.

It was true what Andreas said: Vera and Andi were very good tour guides, informed and amusing, and they loved their city. The walks? Over those five busy days, we did the walking and talking of a month. Their flat was between the Prater and St Stephen’s Cathedral, so we covered that whole area, I wearily believe, and there were all the riverside walks, passing huts so sophisticated they looked like fine all-year homes, a far cry from the shabby (but beloved!) crude shanties of an English allotment (I missed mine). There was Mozart House, the office of the biggest mothball manufacturer in Europe (it did not stink – the factory was elsewhere) and the elegant tailors of Marlene Dietrich and Billy Wilder – a beautiful all-wood shop designed by the architect Loos, who said, “Ornamentation is a crime”. We saw lots of such lovely crime all over town. There was an International Institute for Peace, with biographies I might explore later – African female faces I did not know and would like to look up. There was a truly marvellous sandwich shop with perfect trays of precise open sandwiches – pâtés and other goodies on dark rye – all unique and delightful, plus delicate little glasses of juice. It was a nostalgic favourite of Vera’s from childhood.

Vera had lived her whole life here, and had never thought of going anywhere else. As a reporter, she could really shed light on things, and make a difference, in her home city. Why would she go elsewhere? When we passed a bookshop window featuring that city’s writers, she knew all of them, and had known them for a long time.

The very fit Andi looked able to walk or bike the globe, and quickly. By contrast, Vera and I trailed behind, with her wheezing and fishing for more cigarettes and me always in search of the next place to sit down. But I held up better than I thought I would. I doubted my stamina like they doubted their English. In the end, Andi had a way of steering every walk towards one of the best cake shops in town. That’s a good tour guide – especially in Vienna.





Ancestral gossip highlights, over the week


Both Andreas and Vera said that cousin Jolan never spoke of Uncle Rezso (Rudy). No one knew why. We all found it puzzling, and suspected there was a story behind it. But Jolan didn’t seem to speak of any other aunts or uncles either. It was a splintered group, those seven siblings. I went back to that original note I’d made in 1977 while asking Mom about Dad’s people: “Eugene – brothers or sisters? One was an engineer [I now knew this was Markus]. Someone had a daughter who wrote to Albert until the 1960s.” That was my Uncle Albert, married to Jewish Fran. I think he wrote to Jolan.

I assumed Albert and Fran were the main ones to stay in touch with the Hungarian Jews. Dad and his brothers were split on that issue. Dad and Ed, Catholic like their mother, did not answer any of these letters, mainly for fear of being thought Communist. Our non-Jewish branch knew little of links to Budapest, until now.

I surmised Rudy and Jolan were both snobs, in different ways. If piano-teacher Jolan in the lavish apartment of beautiful things was an intellectual or artistic snob, maybe she looked down on a banker? And vice versa? Another snobbery was revealed when Vera shared how she, like many teens, took a summer job in a factory. Although it was hard, she learned a lot. Jolan did not approve. It offended her snobbish tendencies. “Our family are meant to be generals. We are not meant to be in the front line.” There were some full-on debates between them in those years. That was 1966, when Vera was a teenager, Jolan a senior citizen and I was only nine.

Vera said Jolan always spoke warmly of her dad, Joe Peto, the one thrown out by his mother-in-law Sarolta. Sarolta never liked this “elegant and polite” but worthless charmer who married her poor Berta, always spoke ill of him, called him lazy and a womaniser.





Was Lili more lucky or unlucky?


According to Vera, Jolan said Lili was a carefree happy thing, who had no worries or complaints, a simple country girl. This surprised me. I thought she might feel hard done by, abandoned and neglected by her grandmother. Vera thought Jolan had the harder time. I thought Jolan had money, a good education and advantages, but Vera said Jolan felt responsible for the widowed Sarolta. She had to support her, and these were duties which fell hard on her shoulders. This had never occurred to me. I assumed that Sarolta’s seven children helped support her, but it would be hard to find out. It was certainly Jolan who lived there the longest, and she’d have helped the most, day-to-day.

Sarolta was widowed in 1912, age sixty. Jolan was sixteen, probably still at her finishing school in Dresden. She lived with Sarolta until 1927, when she was thirty-one and getting married. Was Jolan working as a piano teacher in that flat, using the piano we know was there? That’s a likely scenario. In any case, Vera said Jolan felt responsible for Sarolta. Presumably Lili had remained in permanent exile from her grandma? Did Jolan feel Lili got off lightly, not helping the grandmother who’d dumped her as a newborn? It was hard to know.

Then came a sweet nugget. Andreas said Jolan played piano from 1942 to 1943 at a dance school. This lit an inner lightbulb. I checked my notes. Her cousin on the Spitzer side, Gizi (Gizella), had a dance school in Buda listed in the phone books of 1939–40. We could not be 100 per cent sure, but it was a marvellous idea, and probable. Andreas enjoyed this very much. We had a lovely mental image of the class, Gizi the dance teacher, and Jolan at the piano. I wish I’d known her. I wish I’d heard her play.

In my final hours in Andreas and Agi’s home, they shuffled me over to the couches arranged around a low table filled with too many sweet things. We were discussing favourite musicians. I told them I’d studied music with the famous Dr Nagy and they were delighted. I said I only got those free lessons because my name was Hungarian, which they found charming and perfectly natural.



If you spend a few days with people you’ve never met before, there are really only two endings. You plan another visit or you don’t. We did. I was in Budapest for three months, so we agreed I’d come back to Vienna the following month for a whole week. My highlight of this visit occurred at Ruth’s flat, which had a classic doorframe with people’s heights measured in pencil lines with dates and names. I was measured and my line added to the others.

“There,” she said, “now you are part of the family.”





CHAPTER XL Rudy, House of Terror, Cat and Mouse, Cupi



I did it for Uncle Rudy. Otherwise, I might not have gone. The House of Terror usually has a long queue as it is one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city. I had been avoiding it as it details state terrorism and totalitarian dictatorships during the last sixty years of Hungarian history, and is a memorial to the victims of Communism (oh yes, also Nazism and other fascisms - they almost forgot those).

It’s located in a beautiful mansion that was formerly the headquarters of the Hungarian Arrow Cross party, pro-Nazi fascists who ruled Hungary in 1944, then HQ of the Communist Secret Police, up to the 1956 revolution. You can’t miss it. Andrassy street 60 is massive and intimidating, with a huge steel structure across the roof, projecting the huge stencilled word “TERROR” against the sky, while a giant shadow of that word creeps across the building all day.

I relented, having felt obliged to go for a long time, and now I had Uncle Rudy’s cold, black mystery hanging over me. It was 15 March, Revolution Day; all museums were free, and a friend was encouraging.

After Rudy the banker lived at the same address from 1914 to 1950, he seemed to abruptly disappear. Recently I’d asked older cousins from the US crew about him, and heard the following story: After 1945, when Communism grabbed hold of Hungary, allegedly this uncle and his son (of whom I’d heard nothing previously) were involved in a local anti-Communist newsletter, or some kind of pamphleteering. That’s when he disappeared. This was the legend on the US side.

I certainly found no death records for Rudy or his wife Aranka – and nothing about any children. But I knew that plenty of people disappeared during these times. If they simply disagreed with the current regime, that’s all it took. He was a banker, an enemy of the new state. He had a flat and an office worth stealing (“commandeering, liberating”, whatever). If he disappeared, it would have been typical that he was sent to a work camp, or executed, or killed eventually in one of the torture cellars.

So, out of respect for what probably happened to Rudy, I went. It’s good I went. However, it’s a disturbing history. There were displays, videos of interviews with prisoners, propaganda films, memorabilia, text and photos galore. There were many videos offering highly valuable personal testimonies. There was only one room about Nazism, for which the curators have been criticised. Overall, the place is mainly a finger-pointing exercise against Communism, a useful tactic in current politics to smear Socialists by painting them as Commies’ younger cousins.

One room was designed like one of the Soviet boxcars that had transported Hungarian prisoners to the Siberian Gulag. Of the 700,000 Hungarians sent, 300,000 did not return.

Lastly were the detention and torture rooms and the gallows in the cold, damp basement, reached by a lift during whose agonisingly slow descent a video was played of the janitor describing the executions and how he cleaned up after them. There was the wet room, where one’s legs were in freezing water all the time. There were rooms with taps for rinsing away blood. There were implements on the wall, like a cheese-grater as long as your arm. It’s chilling, to say the least.

I felt ill about Uncle Rudy and all others like him.

It may be a popular tourist attraction, but it is not a museum. Still, many people are glad this exhibition exists, lopsided though it is. At least some of the awful truth is out there, about any form of state terrorism, and what has been inflicted on so many people. Now I see why I had to pay respect to Uncle Rudy and other sufferers, and why places like this must exist.





Aranka and the confusing obituary


A plot had just thickened involving Rudy’s wife Aranka. She was a mystery woman. She had married him in 1912, with her brother Hugo the doctor as witness. I knew little more. Then, allegedly her obituary appeared. At first, I did not think this was her. It did not have her first name, only Mrs Rezso Kardos. There was more than one Rezso Kardos in Budapest then. One was a dentist, and I’d confused them before. On top of that, this said the funeral was Roman Catholic, and they were Jewish. Plus, not one of the family mourners’ names was familiar. Conspicuously missing were any of Rudy’s siblings, nieces or nephews. I abandoned this obituary as probably being the wife of that dentist, or someone else altogether.

How wrong one can be?

Aranka popped up last year and this. Last year, someone contacted me via a genealogy site, asking if I was related to Rezso. She asked lots of questions and answered none, until finally she admitted she had no personal interest or link, but worked for a probate company. I didn’t like that approach. She had concealed her real intent for way too long. But I had little information anyway, nor did she, so that chat ended quickly and pointlessly. It did, however, make me suspect there was money somewhere, or they wouldn’t be sniffing around. I knew of no kids for Rudy and Aranka. But, a year later, the snoopers returned.

The Cat and Mouse Probate Company, as I’ll call them, came back in a new disguise, using the same sleazy approach. This time, I got into more dialogue, and got information out of them. I had bargaining chips. I’d been quizzing my cousins all year. I had info, and doled it out bit by bit, after each time they sent me something. I’d outrageously suggested we help each other. They knew I could not inherit, and I only wanted information, so eventually, some good did come of this.

They sent me a copy of Aranka’s death certificate, which I’d failed to locate. It proved that that other obituary was genuine. This was really her. This clarified some issues but confused others. It was clear she died of heart failure age seventy-nine in 1968, at the same Budapest address where she first moved in with a young Rudy in 1912, on Damjanich street. It was gratifying to know this about the two of them.

Strictly speaking, her death certificate listed her as wife, not widow. But if he had still been alive, surely he’d have been mentioned in the obituary? No, she’d outlived him. The other oddity was the wedding date, which was given as 1952. That was completely wrong. They were married in 1912. I had that document. That had to be a mistake or misunderstanding. However, it could be the year of his death. Or, Edit (EH-deet), another helpful genealogist and translator, said maybe it was a second marriage ceremony: couples who were separated during the war, and thought each other dead but were deliriously reunited later sometimes celebrated with a second wedding. It was a plausible theory, but unlikely. I did not know what to do with these odd discrepancies. But I felt or believed that 1952 was his death date. When bankers were detested enemies of that state, 1952 was when many disappeared. I wanted it to be Aranka’s way of putting that on record, which sounds like a plot-turn from a thriller. But I simply had no death certificate for Rudy, which was very frustrating.

There was another annoying thing. The obituary listed a few key family mourners, but unusually, they did not use full names, only nicknames. It was a “You know who you are, inner circle” private message. I sent that list to the cousins, hoping the nicknames might ring a bell, but no one had a clue. The probate people kindly explained who people were, and sent supporting documentation in some cases. Rudy and Aranka did indeed have two children. In the obituary, Feri was their son Ferenc; Klari was their daughter Klara; Gurika was Klara’s husband Gyorgy, and Gyorgy Jr was the son of Klara and Gyorgy. They were all dead and accounted for, said this company. The next name was not: Cupi (TSU-pi). Then the last two were B. Anday Piroska and her husband Dr Karl Bunsdorf, explained as cousins of Aranka. That was a dismissal because cousins could not inherit. Only direct descendants could.

It was now a search for Cupi. If this person was any kind of direct descendant, like a sibling or a child of Gyorgy Jr, he or she deserved to be found and handed an inheritance. I had to write to my US cousins and declare we were all cut out of this scenario, and some high-quality sarcastic replies ensued. I wouldn’t say cut out of his will because no one can find a will, and that’s suspicious, too. I feel sure good old sensible banker Rudy had a will. But I was not surprised it could not be found. This is because when a will cannot be found, the government keeps it all. Without a will, only a direct descendant can make a claim to extract it from them. That meant only kids or grandkids, no one else. There was not much information to go on, but I wanted Cupi to be eligible. I wanted to drink a beer with his or her descendants, who right now did not look like they even existed. It was a genuine mystery, and such an attractive one.

So, the Cat and Mouse Probate Company and I both wanted to find Cupi for different reasons. I was not about to pay them anything to search. They had a financial incentive, but I had none. We ended our dialogue each promising the other to report any developments, and I sense they will not.

Historically, it happened a great deal: when bank accounts and property were confiscated by the state, whether Nazi or fascist or Communist or whatever the uniform or title: documents disappeared, new ones took their place. Wouldn’t you, in those shoes? Then when the robbed make claims, the government requires them to produce the very documents which the government either destroyed or never wrote. Of course his will is “gone”.

Cupi, who and where are you? Or were you the end of your line? If you were some distant relative of Aranka, you can perch on an outer branch. The idea of Rudy’s savings going to the state was a sickening one. Every Kardos lawyer in the extended family, including Dad, would proverbially spin in their graves in consternation, and various bankers, businessmen and stockbrokers – indeed, all his relations – would join that grim dance too. The government might have all Rudy’s savings, but what could one do? I had to let it go.





Rudy and Lipot, underground printers?


News of Rudy stopped around 1952, but some ugly new information came to light.

Almost all documents to do with him used his Hungarian name Rezso. But his birth record said Rudolf. This was common back then: a German version of your name went on the birth record, and after that people used the Hungarian version. So, for the heck of it, I searched for Hungarian documents under the name Rudolf, and behold, a couple of surprises popped up.

He and his dad Lipot had a printing company called Mako. Oddly, Lipot’s name was attached to this company long after he was dead. What were they printing? Rumours said it was anti-Communist material. In 1950, the National Bank of Hungary published a large book listing all the companies that would be “nationalised”, i.e. taken over by the state. Rudy’s Mako Printing Company endured this honour in 1949. In that book, Lipot Kardos was listed as co-owner. He’d died in 1912.

Let’s put a few facts together, scarce although they are. Rezso/Rudy had a printing company, under a name he seldom used, and under the name of his long-deceased father. Family legend said he was connected to the publishing of anti-Communist leaflets or newsletters. Then this printing company was taken over by the government it may have been criticising. Then he disappeared without a trace.

That was all circumstantial, I know. But it didn’t look good, did it?





CHAPTER XLI Vienna, April 2018



Andreas, like me, had spent time gathering family tree material. In a combined mission, we now filled in many holes via teamwork, free association and sheer accident. I asked how people reclaimed confiscated properties after the war. His mother Lili was “persuaded” to sell the family house to the Hungarian government for less than $50.

“It was a compulsory takeover by the state – actually an expropriation, a ridiculous compensation. For example, if the house was worth $20,000 at that time, the compensation was $300.”

Lili died in Auschwitz, but after the war, Andreas got the house back. I asked how. He was young, only a teen. It almost didn’t occur to him to try. He didn’t know how to do anything, but his Aunt Jolan usually knew someone who did, and found a lawyer to help him. Andreas scratched his head and searched his brain for the name. Bruno Somebody.

That rang a bell. I checked on the computer and found Bruno Savolyi. Yes, that was him, Andreas confirmed as he kept scratching his head. What was the link to this man? Some friend of Jolan’s knew him, some cousin or other, some woman…

Notes said this Bruno was the third husband of Cousin Olga.

“Was it Olga? Olga Neufeld?”

“Yes! Olga! Yes!”

His arms shot up in joyous triumph, and he laughed with excitement. This was rare, from what I’d seen so far. Usually, he was a serious, even sometimes a dark, personality, but this discovery made his whole being light up, and he said her name again and again. He had not thought of her in years! She was very good friends with Jolan. They were together all the time in those years, right after the war. Memories bubbled up like champagne.

She was a great cook, he enthused. In 1946–47, she had a sort of lunch restaurant in her apartment. People came and paid for the meals, all on an informal basis. She was there until at least 1948, he thought, although he soon left Hungary and lost touch with her. But he and Aunt Jolan went there to eat all the time. “Every day,” he nodded. “A very good cook,” he smiled.

Olga had a mission to make healthy food tasty, a mission that is close to my heart as well. She was inspired by the work of the then controversial Swiss doctor Max Bircher-Benner who was credited with popularising muesli. Although mostly ridiculed at the time, his radical new theory was that raw foods were more valuable than cooked, fruits and vegetables were more valuable than meat, and that one was better off avoiding canned and processed foods, white flour and white sugar.

That may not seem so radical now, but it was then. Also, after the war, it must have been difficult to find fresh, good food. This, it appears, was Olga’s purpose, and she appears to have succeeded.

Andreas described her as very pretty, warm, charming, friendly, animated and energetic. He smiled and smiled, describing her, waving his arms to show how she gestured. She was no longer just a name I’d read about. I almost felt I’d met her, as with Jolan, too. Oh, for Jolan, Olga and I to have had a cup of tea together, or even a glass of wine. This was a painful, poignant wish.

Andreas wasn’t sure when Olga married Bruno, but I had their marriage certificate from 1937. Andreas explained that Bruno had finished his law studies and was preparing to take the Bar exam. He was living on Pannonia street in the XIII (Andreas knew it well, and had lived nearby). Olga was in the V, on Vaci street 16 (very posh).

After the war, when young Andreas knew them, they were living on Kiraly street. This area was now swish shopping centres, cool little antique and curio markets, plus restaurants and bars. It was filled with tourists in the day, packed with working people in the lunch rush, and buzzed with beautiful hipsters in the evenings. It may have been quieter back then.

Olga and Bruno used to be on my list of the Unaccounted For, but that list had just dropped from twenty to eighteen. And this was all before lunch: vegetable soup, fried mushrooms, potatoes with parsley, wholemeal seeded bread and a colourful mixed salad with pumpkin oil and apple cider vinegar. Andreas was a good cook too.

We clarified that Bruno was Cousin Olga’s third husband. I used to wonder if she was a bit picky, a princess type or a gold-digger, but now that I’d heard more from someone who actually knew her, I think she could have been too active and self-assured a woman for that era’s conventions.

I told Andreas that his dear Aunt Jolan (a second mother to him) helped Olga divorce her second husband, the prestigious Dr Jeno Barsony, renowned obstetrician, professor and head of his department at the nation’s main medical university, even deputy head of the whole medical school for a few years. But a mere two months after the marriage, Olga and Jolan went to a lawyer to draw up a document saying this marriage was over, and the couple did not live as husband and wife. They’d rearranged their flat to have separate apartments, even having separate entrances. They did not speak, or even see each other. She legally declared her intention to divorce him and soon after that, they were indeed divorced.

“Two months? Something awful must have happened,” said Agi, shaking her head. I agreed. Andreas shrugged in a “these things happen” sort of way. He’d heard this doctor’s name, but had no specific memories.

After lunch, Agi had her nap and Andreas, in what was a routine now, rubbed his hands together and announced, “Now to work!” This meant setting up our computers side-by-side and trading questions and information. At eighty-nine, he was remarkably sharp about the internet and computers in general.

“So, Olga and husband number two, the doctor – they had no children?”

“No. And maybe she was too old for kids by the time she married husband number three, Bruno.”

“True,” he said. “But, Olga had a son.”

“Yes, with the first husband, Marcel Hajdu.”

“Yes! That’s him. Now, the son’s name…” He rubbed his head, trying to pull the name out. Again, I had a document, just one small card that simply said he emigrated.

“Was it Tamas?”

“Yes – Tamas!” Another punch to the air, accompanied by a happy grin. “Tommy! I haven’t thought of him in years! Oh Tommy, I liked him very much. He was a good man, a very nice man.”

He explained. After the war in Budapest, Tommy’s post was called economics policeman, meaning he reported black marketeering. Soon though, in about 1948, Tommy went to Italy, where he supervised a displaced persons (DP) camp in Barletta, near Bari.

Later, around 1950, Tommy emigrated to Israel. I told Andreas I’d tried to search for Tommy there, and found nothing. I suspect he probably changed his name to a Hebrew one, like many people did. With time, Andreas and Tommy lost contact. Tommy was about ten years older, so presumably he was now gone from this world.

These memories brought Andreas a world of pleasure, which was itself a pleasure to watch. Now there were only seventeen Unaccounted For. Tamas survived the war.

Our final triumph later in the afternoon was another surprising accident. I said I thought Jolan sounded like a great networker, and he agreed readily and proudly. He named some of the most powerful people in the city at that time whom she knew. Oh, she knew everyone.

She even knew a magazine editor called Gyorgy Vertes (George VER-tesh) who was high up in the Communist Party. Jolan was trying to help a journalist who had suffered for a long time with weak lungs and had become very ill, and so she went to Vertes, perhaps as one journalist to another. The man in question wrote for a rival paper, the Social Democratic publication Nepszava (“The People’s Word”). Vertes’s cold answer was if this man needed help, he should go to the Social Democrats, not him. Jolan was outraged.

This journalist was some cousin or other, Andreas recalled. What was his name again?

There was a writer in the tree, as stated in his marriage certificate. He died in his early forties of tuberculosis in 1945. This was one of Frida’s children from her first marriage with Sandor Gomori, the older upholsterer.

“Was it Laszlo Gomori?”

“Yes, that’s him!” It was his third happy air-punch that day. I had been wondering what kind of writer he was. No books could be found, but now I discovered it was newspapers he wrote for. I’d underestimated him, wondering if he sat in cafés as a pipe-dreaming writer. I stand corrected and apologetic. He was a working journalist all his too-short career.

We were exhausted, pleased, and much better informed. We retired to a reward of tea and cookies, basking in a good day’s work. That evening I returned home to Vera, where even more food awaited me. Around the kitchen table, I filled her in on the latest ancestral gossip. We noticed that during this second visit, I was finally welcomed by their cat Logo, whose preferred game was to attack people from behind in agonisingly fully-clawed mode. This was only for an exclusive group of loved ones. He now played wholeheartedly with me, so I was pleased and flattered, only bled a little bit, and shrieked suddenly from time to time, just like the rest of the family.





Ancestral gossip, April highlights


Jolan’s ex-husband, actor Lajos Kopeczi-Boocz, was referred to in a Prisoner’s Record from 1922. It declared Boocz did military service, and was a Budapest citizen. He agreed that an investigation was going on, and his younger brother Istvan was in jail. Later, Istvan was released but told not to leave the capital. They might call him back into court. He had to promise to show up, and Lajos had to swear to make Istvan comply. He was only being detained temporarily. All agreed, swore and signed.

In a Prisoner’s Record for the following year relating to Lajos being charged with a “crime against the social order”, he was described thus: “164 cm, very short, average build, round face, healthy skin colour, brown hair, high forehead, brown eyebrows and eyes, normal nose and mouth, missing teeth, moustache (stylised or chiselled), jaw is round, special marks or other – stares into the distance, something off-target with his gaze.” The last bit might be due to his morphine addiction, as might be the “crime against the social order”.

He was born on 14 February 1894, in Budapest. His last address was in the VIII, Koferhjo street 7. Mother tongue – Hungarian, German, English. Religion Reformed – (Calvinist). Family status – legitimate child of legal marriage. Father’s name was Jozsef and was still alive. Divorced. No children. “Profession: clerk or office worker” (he was not an actor yet). He was in the military. He could read and write, had completed secondary school and done his final exams. No money. No previous offences.

He was released on 15 November 1923 with no conditions, no parole, free to go. Five years later, he married Jolan.





Unfinished business for a Spitzer girl


Lujza Spitzer, (Sarolta’s niece, by her brother Miksa), better known as Mrs Salamon Nagy, did various property business with and without her husband. I also recall her as having the best corset collection of all those recorded in prenups for Spitzer and Kardos girls, and they all had extensive enticements in their lingerie lists. The City Archives coughed up a document from 1937 about an inheritance. She died on 15 September 1937, but for some reason, the death was recorded in 1938. She was living at Honved street 16 in an illegible district.

This will stipulated it must be secured in a locked place. They kept it so safe that I could not find what they were talking about. Only the cover letter was in the file, saying that after the will was processed, there would be an inheritance tax. It also promised there were three copies of the will attached, to be kept safe. They were not attached.

It was not the first time. I saw many cases where a will and property were mentioned, which may be the very reason it all went missing. This was just one more.





And finally, our Zsa Zsa prevailed


Hurrah! We have one less name on the Unaccounted For List of people who may or may not have survived the war. What’s more, this survivor was found accidentally, my favourite method. During the latest translation session, a photo of a tiny slip of paper showed the burial record of cousin Klara Spitzer, the niece of GGM Sarolta (her brother Miksa’s third daughter of four: Lujza, Gizi, Klara and Margit.)

It said Klara was divorced from husband Istvan Revesz, was seventy-five when she died of arteriosclerosis, was born and died in Budapest, and had an illegible occupation. She died on 20 May 1963, and was buried three days later in the Kozma Street Cemetery.

Now, the last line: who reported the death? Mrs Oszkar Maliczki.

Guess who that was? That was Our Zsa Zsa!

Cousin Margit Spitzer, Klara’s sister, was our legendary three-times married winner, each husband richer than the previous, as far as I could see or hope for. Her prenuptial agreements had some sharp teeth, along the lines of saying, “Everything I bring to this marriage, I keep if I leave. But, half of everything of yours now belongs to me, and I take all that, if I leave.” I wish I could have met the woman who persuaded a man to sign that. Maybe if the man were rich enough, it was no big deal. At any rate, Margit lived in a world I have never even visited. Her third and final husband was Oszkar, a retired army general. I had no records of Margit and Oszkar after 1944 and thought maybe they had died in the war.

Not so.

This document proved Margit was still alive in 1963, age seventy-three; in fact, plenty alive enough to arrange for the burial of her sister Klara, two years older. There were four Spitzer girls plus their surprise baby brother Oszkar, born seven years later. Klara and Margit were the younger two, born close together. Then there was a gap of several years between them and the older two, Lujza and Gizi, also born close together. I saw Lujza, Gizi, Klara and Margit as Bossy, Smart, Quiet and Pretty, as in a Hungarian adaptation of Little Women.

On a serious note, now that I knew Margit and sister Gizi actually survived into the 1960s, our Unaccounted For List went down another couple of notches. That was very satisfying. Someone else had got through – hurrah for Quiet Klara and Pretty Margit.

It was partly a triumph for persistence, and partly a celebration of sheer accident.





CHAPTER XLII Erik Weisz, aka Harry Houdini



I made a pilgrimage to the House of Houdini – illusionist, stunt performer, escape artist, actor, pilot, historian, film producer and debunker of spiritualism. He was born Erik Weisz in Budapest in 1874 and the family moved to New York when Erik was young. A travelling magician came by, and show business grabbed him. He debuted at age nine as trapeze artist “Ehrich, the Prince of the Air”. Later he took (semi-stole) the stage name “Harry Houdini”, doing magic and escapology.

Working Coney Island with his brother Dash as “The Brothers Houdini”, he met his future wife Bess, then in an act called “The Floral Girls”. Dash dated her first, but it was Harry she married, remaining his stage assistant for years. Soon he was a vaudeville star, touring Europe as “Harry Handcuff Houdini” where he challenged police forces to keep him locked up. They could not.





His most famous and popular stunts


The Chinese Water Torture Cell: he was held upside down in a locked cabinet full of water.

The Suspended Straitjacket: he was suspended by his ankles, which were locked into stocks, and hung from a tall building, escaping in full view of the crowd, once in less than three minutes.

The Overboard Box: he was handcuffed, leg-ironed, and nailed into a crate that was submerged in water. He once escaped in 57 seconds.

The Vanishing Elephant: performed at the New York Hippodrome.

In the 1920s, Houdini became obsessed with debunking psychics, spiritualists and mediums. He went to séances in disguise with a reporter and a police officer. Many people say this started after his mother died. He was so close to her and missed her so badly that he tried to contact her spirit through these channels, popular in those years. He was duped by a fraud, and was so angry that revenge became his mission.

This was how Harry met Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who sought mediums when he could not accept his son’s death in the Great War. They endured their losses around the same time, and stayed friends for many years. Doyle believed in spiritualism right to the end. Houdini died first, and Doyle never ceased attempting to contact his spirit, inspiring a popular movement.

The stunt that almost killed Houdini was the Buried Alive Trick. First, he was buried, with no casket, six feet underground, and had to be rescued, unconscious. The next time was in a sealed casket thrown into a pool. The last plan involved a straitjacket and a sealed casket buried in sand. However, he died – on Halloween – in 1926 before he could try it. Over two thousand people attended his funeral.

If a handcuff fetish is your thing, the House of Houdini is for you. There were also dozens of keys, needles and strange implements that he hid or pretended to eat or I don’t know what.

It’s a weird little place, and a twenty-five-minute tour through three rooms is disappointing. The guide said that Bess’s Catholic family so strongly opposed her marriage to a Jew that they shunned the couple, who lived in poverty for years before his career took off, even though her affluent family could have helped them. The couple was close and loving, by all accounts.

As for his cause of death, some said it was peritonitis, and some said appendicitis. Some said it was an assault by two enraged fans of a medium whom Harry had publicly humiliated. They beat him badly in the gut, although as a cause of death this has been questioned. But the insurance company interviewed the two who beat him, decided this was the cause, and paid out double indemnity – allegedly.

The museum was furnished with crates, safes, boxes and metal booths used as props from the 2014 TV mini-series Houdini. It was plastered in photos, posters and memorabilia. Houdini was rather an attractive guy, very muscular, with piercing eyes, a charismatic smile and full, kissy lips. He radiated charm, magnetism and virility.

The museum’s tour was followed by a magic show, which was pretty good. I know a little about this as I worked in a comedy magic act for about three years, long ago. It was a double act called Dork and Tacky. The bungling magician was Dork, and obviously, I was Tacky.

I had a big Dolly Parton blonde wig, a canary yellow tutu, loads of sequins, and a crude southern American accent that only worked in England. We did late-night comedy clubs around London, with cheap, smutty humour for drunk people. We did not exactly get calls for children’s parties.

So, here I knew most of the card tricks, some of the ball tricks, a hanky trick, but none of the rope tricks. I clapped and laughed like I knew nothing. Why ruin his game? I was not what I appeared, either. Who would think the old lady in the back once did these very tricks in a crass outfit in grubby clubs?

Most magicians do the same tricks, but vary the style and the chit-chat. This guy had nicely accented English, and the style was suave and cool. He was dark, slender and sinewy, with beautifully lithe hands, so flexible and strong that he could sculpt clay or seduce anyone he wanted.

Our comedy magic act was nothing like that. We did disaster magic, with everything rehearsed meticulously to go totally wrong. Dork said he’d produce a rabbit, and out would pop a plastic fish. He’d use his plastic cane to bop me on the head to the tune of Tito Puente’s “Miami Beach Mambo” and little red balls would pop out of my mouth in time to the music. He’d threaten to saw me in two, and I’d yell, “The hell you will!” Then, to a heavy metal soundtrack, I’d decapitate him, which always got a laugh.

The 2014 TV series about Houdini was made in Hungary, and the ads looked excellent. It starred Adrien Brody (Best Actor in 2002 for Roman Polanski’s The Pianist), perfectly smouldering casting. The handcuff scene in the bedroom looked intriguingly kinky. Dork and Tacky used handcuffs too, but only for comedy. If a guy heckled too much, he was handcuffed to the bar and his beer stolen. That always got a laugh too.

It’s good I was heavily disguised. On a good night, I got offstage and changed quickly back into my own clothes, went to the bar and ask people what that magic act was like, to get honest reactions. But on a rough night, I escaped out the back door.

Hey presto!





43 Vienna, May 2018



By the time I went to visit the cousins in Vienna a third time, we had fewer family-tree questions for each other, and more chances to just spend time together, like going boating (very cold water), or swimming (much too cold water), or watching TV, or surfing the internet for music clips, or going to art and photography exhibits. Along the way, stray bits of ancestral gossip floated by.





We never stole a train


Amusingly, Andreas and his offspring had different versions of how he got from Dachau to Budapest after the war. It was a blessed moment when Allied Forces opened those gates, but chaos ensued. Barely functioning, many inmates could not see what to do first. A group inside were organisers. Andreas explained that Dachau was different to Auschwitz – more of a work camp than a death camp, and there were more people there for political rather than racial reasons. So a small nucleus of the politically minded was formed creating a leadership committee, which Andreas, a teenager, followed.

“They organised transport, that’s all,” Andreas shrugged, and did not go further. But his family told me with pleasure that this group found a locomotive, stole it in all the mayhem, crammed as many people as possible into and onto it, and chugged back to Budapest. So, they were heroes all, in my book, and I saluted them – especially if it was the type of train that brought them there in the first place. He added that the group stayed together in Budapest on arrival for about two months, but he lost track of them.

He was only there for about three years, planning how to leave. He finished high school, started university, managed to regain and then sell the family house, and did a little journalism for Hungarian newspapers. For work, he did not use the name of his father, Weisz, or stepfather, Windholtz, but of his grandfather Peto. If I’d been a writer back then, I too would never have used my real name.





German Secret Service


“I worked for the German Secret Service,” Andreas muttered slyly, watching my eyebrows rise. Then he waved away my seriousness. “It was not very effective; in fact, it was a joke. I watched delivery vans, cleaners, gardeners, anyone who looked suspicious. No one ever did… I worked for the so-called OG or Organization Gehlen, the forerunner of the later Federal Intelligence Service (BND). The OG was exclusively offensive; my job was to get information from Hungary. In Vienna, I searched for people who had or could get such information.”

He added that he was not a Communist-hunter, meaning he was nothing like the McCarthyites in 1950s America. I’d described to him McCarthyism’s damaged careers, wrongful prison time, the paranoia of some – including my family – who were too scared to help or even contact relatives “behind the Iron Curtain”, despite the begging letters they received, maybe from Jolan or others close to her. Andreas and others seemed surprised about the extent of the persecution, so maybe that bit of US history is less known outside. But, he also said if the USA was anti-Communist, West Germany was even more so.

They were looking for messages between Austrian and Hungarian Communists on radio or in newspapers. His contact was a direct link between him and the CIA, one Lieutenant-Colonel Gyorgy Kolenyi, chief of the Hungarian section of the German Secret Service. They employed Andreas from 1953 to 1964.





Jolan and the pigeons


Around 1952, Jolan had her one contact with the Hungarian Secret Service, of which she was deathly afraid. In general, she could be a very tough cookie, but at times she was also what Andreas called a scaredy-cat. She never used her full married name Kopeczi-Boocz, but only Boocz, which she thought made her less of a target and more Hungarian. When there was a knock at the door calling her full name, she panicked. How did they know? They said they knew everything about her and she had to open the door, so she did, feeling it was now her time to die. The two men standing there said she’d be safe if she did them a service. They needed someone to spy on her neighbour. From her window, she had a clear view of the roof and a pigeon coop from which he might be sending messages.

She did as she was told. She made reports about what time a bird flew out, when it flew back in, and so on. She never knew what became of these reports. But the neighbour seemed fine, then and later. In the end, she figured he kept birds and nothing more. When Stalin died in early 1953, they stopped asking for these reports.

After Hungary’s failed revolution in 1956, Andreas interviewed Hungarian refugees who came to Austria. None had military connections but were ordinary citizens fleeing. He never went back to Budapest until 1978, and was still nervous to visit that Communist state, after all the spying and anti-Communist writing he had done. He felt like they knew everything he did and had watched him the entire time. However, he’s been back repeatedly since then.





Vienna Archives and other features


14 May 2018, a Monday. I went with Vera to the Vienna City Archives to confirm Berta’s birth address. We went to see their flat in a grand location, near where Mahler died, near the main medical university and many hospitals. Although the archive confirmed Berta’s birth address, they could not find much more.

15 May. Vera and I went to the Jewish Archives where we got copies of the birth records of Berta and Frida. It was a classic archive experience, agreed Vera, because in that two-person office, there was a helpful, smiling young one and a grumpy, frowning old one. We got the nice one, thank heavens. I do not think they take turns. I think they’d never point this Grumpy at anyone.

It was a lovely walking tour all the way there and back, with Vera’s fulsome commentary. We discussed how difficult it was, at times, to smile or feel positive when reading about so much ugliness across history. We agreed sometimes we could only listen to current news as filtered through political satirists or comedians. We talked about dozens of different things. I concluded she was the heart, spine, and muscle of this branch. She left home aged seventeen, stayed with one friend after the next, then moved into a collective, which was a thing then, in her Maoist phase. I never had the nerve to leave like that, although I dreamed of it every day. She spoke of her first real working years as a psychiatric nurse. She loved it, but back then, those places were punishing, like prisons. She lobbied for reform, and of course, she did not stay. Years later, such ideas were more accepted, but by then she’d spent twenty years in news journalism, and raised a family on that.

The next day it was too cold for me but Vera and grandson went swimming. Ruth cleared out her overstuffed wardrobe and gave me a nice pile of family hand-me-downs. She needed the space. I said charity shops always need donations, but she’d rather give to friends.





Cousin Rosette


Rosette was a cousin of Aranka, Rudy’s wife, according to the Cat and Mouse Probate Company. On Aranka’s obituary, Rosette’s name came after the mysterious Cupi. This gave her real name, B. Anday Piroska, but her stage name was Rosette Anday.

She was an opera singer, a leading contralto of mid-twentieth-century Europe, one of the youngest designated “Kammersangerin”, a German honorific title for distinguished singers. Raised in Budapest, she got her break when she was heard by the Vienna State Opera. She was signed in 1920 and debuted as Carmen. She had a busy career performing major roles by Mozart, Verdi, Wagner, Strauss, Saint-Saens and more. She was once accompanied by Richard Strauss at the piano. She was an early champion of Gustav Mahler’s Das Lied von der Erde, performing it with such noted conductors as Bruno Walter and Oskar Fried. Although the Vienna State Opera was her main base, she toured extensively, and retired in 1961 to a life of teaching. Most of her recorded legacy has been preserved on CD.

By way of gossip, Andreas said she married a Christian diplomat and was very clever about hiding being Jewish. He did not recognise the name of this husband, Karl Bunsdorf, and I could find no other records of him either. Andreas wished he’d met Rosette, who was friends with his mother Lili. He was encouraged to contact her in Vienna after the war, where he arrived as a scraggly refugee from a displaced persons camp, but he never managed to meet her. Sadly, this was due to a recently suffered rejection when he dutifully reported to the home of another friend of a friend, only to be harshly and coldly rejected, rushed out like a diseased beggar. Refugees in need were not universally welcomed. It so demoralised him, he had no nerve to contact Rosette the Great Singer, fearing more rejection and humiliation. He shrugged with ambivalence that these things happen.

In Andreas’s home, the late afternoon pattern was to relocate to the low corner table surrounded by couches, with sweeties all over the table, while friends and neighbours dropped in one after the other. Stories percolated out of him and them, and I could see good long friendships in these people. The elders had a strong network of supporters nearby.

The favourite name drop of that day was Arthur Koestler. Andreas casually mentioned they’d taught at the same university, but not at the same time. Koestler was just another colleague, in spirit. “Darkness at Noon, very good, I recommend that. All his scientific stuff is rubbish.” I made a note.





More musical nostalgia


Via Andreas, I met the bubbly Klara, pianist and professor at the exquisite Vienna University of Music. She took me to a recital by her students who were rehearsing pieces for upcoming exams. It took me back to my youth when I was much like them. I said music was only in my distant past, but she smilingly insisted that once a pianist, always a pianist. She had a warm manner, great English and a cute giggle.

Andreas and Agi mentioned that Jolan was in love with a concert pianist named Tibot Szatmari. They quickly added that they believed there was no real affair, and she was rather young at the time, so it was more likely an infatuation. I looked him up. He was about her age, studied in Budapest, taught there, had a few famous pupils, and also toured a bit. Alas, love with Jolan was not meant to be.





Olga neni?


Andreas made a poignant observation about Olga and her third husband Bruno, the lawyer who helped him get his house back. Andreas recalled him as a huge, tall man. He also recalled, with sympathy, that Olga never called him “my husband”, but only “Bruno”, in a way he found odd. He could not say it was a bad marriage, but he could not say it was affectionate.

He said many people called her “Olga neni”. At first, I heard that as Olganini, Italian style, fabulously cute but wrong. He said “neni” was Aunty, or an older lady you were fond of. I wish I’d met Olga neni. I especially wish I’d eaten lunch with her.





Leopold Bloom was Hungarian?


James Joyce’s Leopold Bloom character in his novel Ulysses was said to have been born in the town of Szombathely, where Andreas was born. Why? No one knows for sure. Andreas had a theory. Both Joyce and Andreas’s father were in Trieste at the same time. Oszkar Weisz was an architect and building contractor, constructing the port. His office building had a sign “Weisz and Muller, Szombathely”. Maybe Joyce saw that and took it, knowing it would be a riddle forever? Indeed, it will be a riddle forever. In Szombathely there is a statue of Joyce, and an annual Joyce festival, to this day.





Last bits of gossip from the elders


Andreas learned to speak Hungarian from his parents and German from his nanny. While it was the German of Germany rather than the Austrian German that he’d need later, at least he didn’t start from scratch when he emigrated to Vienna. He said there were always five or six servants in their household, which roused sarcasm from both myself and Vera. He was an only child. There was even a car. He said he was used to comforts and servants, and he rather liked it. You could see that, as an academic, he was fine with everyone listening to his every word while he lectured away.

He told a story from his childhood: he was put in charge of a group of boys on some manual task, and he assigned them to it while he sat lazily on the grass. He said no matter where he’d have been born, he’d probably have acted so. In fact, he ventured, if he’d been born into some Nazi Aryan family, maybe he’d have been swept up in Nazism like the others. Agi was outraged by that, but he stayed cool. While she shouted bitterly about wearing a yellow star as a child, being spat at and sworn at, Andreas calmly mentioned they were still here: they survived. He stated the statistics of various huge massacres, and said that the way to get past one’s pain was to look at the bigger picture, to think of the bigger group and not only one individual. He was not the only one to suffer injustice, but he was one of the lucky few to survive.

With that wise thought, and after a series of warm, clinging hugs and simple promises to keep sending news, I caught the train back to Vera’s, where I packed my case and met the rest of the gang for dinner, before the evening train back to Budapest.





2019 Wish List


Staying in touch, and planning a visit next year, was now assumed. The cousins met at their usual Japanese restaurant, and pondered the scratchy handwriting of Roza’s prenuptial contract. They identified only a few words, so we declared it yet another document to stay in the vault, never to be understood. There were plenty of those.

I was inspired by Andreas’s story of driving back to Vienna from Budapest with a huge tray of flodni cake in the back. I was pleased to hear he adores this cake too. He said they froze it in sections, and had a series of treats. Next visit, if Vera confirms we cannot find any in Vienna, I secretly vowed to surprise him with some from Budapest. It would be my great pleasure.

A plan was born.





CHAPTER XLIV Rudy, Two Churches, Two Kids, Two Cemeteries



As my last fortnight crept towards me, one folder still had a large question inside. Did Rudy and family convert to Christianity? Rudy arranged for a note to be added to his son Ferenc’s birth record, claiming that the boy and both parents had converted to Catholicism. The note is clear in some ways, but odd in others. There was no such mention of their daughter Klara, ten years younger than the boy.

The mother and father received from their local parish office of Erzsebetvaros in Budapest, and from the Buda Castle Coronation Church Parish Offices, documents numbered 218/1930, 96/1930, and 2214/1918. According to your letter, the Roman Catholic religion was joined 1930, 26 April. The father was Kardos Rezso.

Signed,

Islany Laszlo, 330/1998

If those second numbers represented dates, then two things happened in 1930, and something else in 1918? A few people advised me that the 1918 and 1930 dates made sense. There were two huge waves of Jews converting to Christianity around those times.

It was time to go to church, which I have never done willingly. Two churches were listed on Ferenc’s birth record. I went to the local one first, a massive skyscraper of golden brick and lavish artwork. Inside, a kindly fellow tried to help me. I showed him a specially prepared note in Hungarian, explaining I wanted to photograph the conversion records. I also showed him the above record.

He was amenable, but he too thought the birth record note was odd. He puzzled over the numbers, wondering if they stood for the years. He brought out an enormous book, the kind I love, with great brittle yellow pages one turns tenderly, with a different clerk’s spidery handwriting for each entry. Adult converts were listed with all other baptisms of babies. We looked and looked, and found nothing for any of those years. We even looked through several years before and after, to no avail. Perhaps the main record was kept at the main church, the magnificent St Matyas on Castle Hill in Buda. The next chance I had, I crossed the river to find out. This search took quite a few tries.

St Matyas Church was well organised for tours and visitors, but maybe not for what I was researching. I showed my magic note in Hungarian to the helpful guy taking tickets. He went inside and soon emerged with a pamphlet and a circled address of the church office nearby. I walked over, and stood before a list of bells for various departments I didn’t understand. I rang each bell, one by one, and got no answer. A man arrived, simply said to me “No”, went in and shut the door. Later I phoned and phoned and phoned and phoned and eventually got an appointment.

They too were puzzled by the numbers and said it was nothing to do with dates or years. This young man, bless him, with his excellent English, had gone through every year from well before 1918 to well after 1930. He did not find Rudy or either of his children. However, he did find Rudy’s wife, Aranka. It appears she did make an official conversion. They provided me with a document, stamped and signed and official-looking, that told me the following about the person who was unquestionably our Aranka (with my comments):

Baptismal Certificate. Year 1920 (not 1918, not 1930). Page 56, name 35. Hollander “Aurelia Eugenia”, born (Aranka, Jewish) on 17 August 1889. Baptised as Catholic, 30 May 1920 (she was thirty-one). Her father was Ede Hollander, profession office worker, her mother Berta Reichsmann. Her address (as it was for many decades), Damjanich street 25 (although strangely that was husband Rudy’s business address and their home was number 12). Witnesses included her brother, Dr Hugo Hollander (oldest of six siblings, while Aranka was the surprise baby six years after the previous one). The other witness was Eugenia Salamon (about whom I knew nothing, but she sounded Jewish).

The document confirmed her new full married name as Mrs Rezso Kardos, Hollander Aurelia. Perhaps that was purely ceremonial. She was buried under her birth name Aranka Hollander, according to the public obituary notice.

At the bottom was a pretty blue stamp with a mother and child, verifying all information on the paper they gave me, on 29 May 2018.

As for Rudy and son Ferenc, whatever was jotted on young Ferenc’s birth record now looked unconvincing, and the letter mentioned even less so. If Rudy and son joined either their neighbourhood church, or St Matyas the main one, neither church noticed. My theory is that Rudy faked things in an attempt to protect them. Also, maybe they hoped that if Aranka converted, then by Jewish law, her children wouldn’t be Jewish – as if that mattered with Nazis.

Again, it called to mind my 1977 note about Eugene: “Something upset him, age 17, changed religion. WW2, left religion.”

Aranka, according to her obituary, had a Catholic funeral, presumably arranged by her children Ferenc and Klara. I wondered which religion they were raised in, if any. If Rudy and Aranka were typical of this crew, they didn’t bother much unless they had to.

I wished I knew more. I’d learn more after two trips to the Public Cemetery.

There was one lead. After the Cat and Mouse Probate Company gave me Aranka Kardos’s exact death date, I could search for where she was buried. I found nothing before, in the usual websites, but her obituary said clearly it was the Budapest Public Cemetery. Unlike some cemeteries, this one, the city’s main and largest, has no online public database. You must physically go to the office to enquire. I took the rickety tram that stops at every bush, with my carefully translated note in hand. With it, various people shunted me towards the right door, into an office where three clerks sat behind cages. They all looked grumpy. One was a bit less so, so I headed for Mrs Probably At Least Hugged Her Kids Today.

I smiled and passed her my note which read: “Apologies I do not speak Hungarian. My aunt is buried here. Please help me find her grave?”

She allowed a small but warm smile, went to her computer, and wrote the plot number on a small map with our two blocks circled. The four-part address code made no sense. Usually you get block-row-grave, like 20-2-14. This was 200/111-1-15. I couldn’t see how to navigate.

I thought of Aranka, and savoured having found her. This spread a warm smile over me, which evoked another one from her. That’s when I turned over my little note: “Please also look for her husband, son, daughter, son-in-law and grandson?” I’d listed names and dates. She gave me a hard squint which grudgingly admitted, “Well played.” She gathered the info.

Aranka’s daughter Klara was also buried there, in 2002, with her husband Gyorgy Emod (born Erlich). Mrs Clerk confirmed for sure that husband Rudy was not there, nor was son Ferenc, nor was grandson Gyorgy Jr. That puzzled me, but she was sure, and I trusted her, so I thanked her.

I had not understood the scale of the place. I walked for half an hour, and realised at the first signpost I’d only gone a tenth of the way. I returned another day with translator Edit in her car. After getting lost and phoning the office, we learned that the last number on the grave address didn’t matter. First was the block. Second was the row, which was always counted from the corner closest to the office (aha!). Third was the grave. We went and tromped all over what we could access, but found nothing. We could not access everywhere, as much was high jungle. It might be in there, and it might be covered over.

We returned to the office, where I prevailed upon Edit to ask who paid for these burials, hoping for a clue. Who arranged for Klara’s burial in 2002? Was it her son, Gyorgy Jr? I was hoping to see if there was a sibling, or someone else in the frame, even a Cupi. Edit was a great diplomat, but our newly assigned clerk only knew one stock answer and repeated it endlessly. We learned Aranka’s grave was kept up for twenty-five years, but then no one paid. Unless we were paying, no information was forthcoming. About Klara and Gyorgy’s grave? Even without knowing a word, I could sense their dialogue:

Edit: We are searching for lost family. We are asking who arranged for that burial.

Clerk: That one is all paid up.

E: Yes, thank you. This lady is family. She wants to find the family who paid.

Clerk: It’s paid, what do you care who paid?

E: We want to find lost family.

Clerk: But it’s paid, what more do you want?

E: We want to know who they are! She’s trying to find lost family!

Finally, Robo-Clerk said we could email their legal department, which we did. I was not expecting anything in return. The visit was slightly disappointing but in no way surprising. Edit needed to go get her kids, and it was getting damned hot and mosquito-y. All further questions had to wait until the following year, or maybe forever. In the meantime, I dug up what I could about two of our newer characters, Rudy’s son Ferenc and his grandson Gyorgy.





Ferenc Kardos, chemist and inventor (1912–1998)


Ferenc was born in Budapest, and was only two years older than Dad, his direct cousin. Dad’s undergraduate work was in chemical engineering, so I’m sure – in fact, painfully certain – these two men would have enjoyed talking about engineering and technology, and I wish they’d been able to.

I was delighted to learn from his obituary that his mother Aranka was a teacher. Ferenc’s CV was long, detailed and impressive. I’ve selected some highlights. Since there was good news and bad news, let’s start in reverse order.

“In the Second World War, he served on the front lines, and was a prisoner of war from 1943 to 1948.” This was a doubly low blow. Jewish men were only drafted into the Hungarian army in “forced labour battalions”, meaning slave labour. If he tried to insist he’d converted to Catholicism, maybe things were less hideous at first, but I doubt it.

Forced labourers were often expected to buy and bring their own food, clothing and supplies. They were suicidally ill-equipped. On the Eastern Front, some divisions marched 1,000 kilometres before they even saw their enemy. They were badly fed or unfed, and often brutalized. Men in mines or quarries were frequently pushed to their deaths. Others were marched into minefields to clear them for the regular troops.

The grotesque irony was that when those enemies of the Hungarian state, the Jews, were forced to support that army, and when that army was crushed by the Soviets, the Jewish slave-prisoners of the Hungarians became the slave-prisoners of the other side, the Soviets.

Ferenc could have been part of the ill-fated Hungarian Second Army, which was almost entirely eliminated during the Battle of Stalingrad, especially at the infamous River Don battle. Of the starting number of about 200,000 Hungarian soldiers and 50,000 Jewish forced labourers, by the end, 100,000 were dead, 35,000 wounded, and 60,000 taken as prisoners of war. Only about 40,000 men returned to Hungary. Hitler, who promised supplies that were never sent, blamed them for the defeat.

Ferenc spent five years in a Russian POW camp.

The Hungarian government said there were no records of the forced labour service.

However, Ferenc went home after five years, and continued his productive life. He’d already finished his education and begun his career. In 1935, he was Professor of Natural Sciences and Chemistry at Pazmany Science University. In 1936, he received his doctorate while on the Faculty of Chemical Engineering, Jozsef Nador University of Technology and Economics.

His obituary in a science magazine read: “He was fundamentally engaged in technological developments related to the production of light sources in Hungary. He was the first to experiment with a small-diameter television screen. He developed a novel type of photometer and colour screen, special soldering wires, and a children’s therapeutic procedure for bilirubin levels.”

There were dozens of more examples. He also wrote articles for many professional journals. There was a long list. These are my top three for lack of comprehensibility:

Electrolytic growth of silver and cadmium single crystals

Determination of moisture content based on the dielectric constant change

Application of ethyl silicate in vacuum technology

There was much more along those lines. We have living engineers in the family, so I considered sending the full list to them. The trouble is, they may try to explain. So, perhaps not.





Gyorgy Emod, actor, translator, writer, theatre director (1902–1984)


In the 1989 film The Music Box, cousin Gyorgy is in there, playing the part of Andras Nagy, politician and judge, Minister of Justice 1938–39, Speaker of the House 1939–45, and imprisoned for life by the People’s Tribunal in Budapest. (This crime thriller with Jessica Lange and Armin Mueller-Stahl is excellent and I recommend it.) Gyorgy Jr was the only son of Klara Kardos Emod and Gyorgy Emod Sr. He worked in theatre, film and TV. He wrote translations of Macbeth and several Eugene O’ Neill plays. He worked in regional theatres and in the USA from 1978 to 1986, playing parts in Shakespeare (Orsino, Ross, Flute), and Hungarian plays too.

A strange challenge got added to the 2019 Wish List. Surely in Budapest, there was a bar where actors hang out, even some older actors. Gyorgy was sixty when he died in 2013, so somebody might remember him. It was a long shot but that didn’t matter; it could be fun trying.

The Feszek Club was the arty place where cousin Marcel Hajdu was a member in the 1920s. Did journalist cousin Laszlo Gomori go there? Cousin Angyalka’s artist husband Jozsef Suto? Would they have membership records from long ago? There was little risk in asking. I saw an excursion in the making, a pleasant one, for when archives coughed up too much grisly news and a drink was in order.

Gyorgy Jr was still a sketchy figure. His stage credits were mostly classical roles, and not very numerous. He never married and had no children, to our knowledge. I had no idea where he was buried, and had checked all the obvious places, so that seemed strange. Also, it was too recent for his death record to be available to the general public. However, I had a funny instinct that if I just hung around in the right theatre bar, with a good translator, maybe a trail would appear. Or at least some lovey theatre gossip. It was only a matter of rounds. Obviously, research was destined to continue.





CHAPTER XLIV: Bye-Bye BP 2018, Plans for 2019



Budapest and Prague are preferred locations for stag nights of English and German men. Usually, they are in wolfpacks of twenty to thirty in matching T-shirts. Two such fellows, drunk almost beyond words, were at the door of the hotel but without the ability to use keys. I helped. One shook my hand heartily, thanking me repeatedly. We shared the lift. Something compelled me to speak further.

“Just two of you? Don’t stag nights usually have more?”

“There’s ten of us,” burped the stout one.

“No,” said the taller, louder one. “There’s two! See? You and me.”

Incomprehension followed.

Taller Joker continued, grinning, “The poor groom doesn’t have many friends, just us two.”

Shorty caught on. “Yeah, he’s a loser. We’re only here out of pity.” They giggled uncontrollably.

“Wow, you’re loyal pals,” I smiled. The giggling increased. “So, the bride, she’s blind then?”

They exploded with laughter.

“Totally blind! If she could see him, she’d never go through with it.”

Shorty added, “Deaf too, obviously.”

“Yeah!” roared Joker. “And crippled. She can’t even run away and escape. It’s not fair, really.”

They were laughing so hard, we were lucky they didn’t piss themselves, right then and there. I got out first, and said, “Have fun.”

Joker shook my hand again, not joking at all now, saying seriously and directly in a brotherly manner, “Thank you, sir. Thank you.” That’s when I exploded with laughter, to their slack-jawed bewilderment. Then he jumped back as the closing doors nearly bopped him on the nose.

Overall, that was typical of tourist summer in Budapest’s VII, which is why it was time for me to leave. Research was mostly loose ends and disorganisation, despite very interesting questions now flooding in from Vienna. I was peeling my lists off the walls while starting a new one and watching it grow. Wish List 2019 was filling up.



A week or two earlier, Vera and Andi came to visit Budapest for a few days, where they hadn’t been in many years. I recall many hours of walking along the Danube, St Margaret’s Island with a picnic and an open-air nap, a sweet boat taxi, a couple of interesting photo exhibitions, the Communist Memento Park with friends of theirs (just the boys) while girl cousins, Vera and I, did an Our Houses Tour of the VI and VII. We had a flodni cake contest: Rachel’s – 2, Koleves/Stone Soup Café – 1, and an honourable mention for the extra walnuts from the kosher place on Dob street.

My overall highlight was seeing Vera remember the spoken Hungarian of her childhood, and apply it in the dead of night to two local idiots blasting loud, distorted music with a massive earthquake bass speaker filling the entire back of their car and shaking our windows. She went downstairs, spoke to them, and they stopped. Those are professional nursing skills. And finally, we had a long, lazy day at a spa. At the end of it all, I accompanied them to their train, just like they’d taken me to mine, and that’s where we said, “See you next year.”



I measured my final week in Budapest in terms of last chances; for example, last pub quiz, last goulash, and so on, in a string of bye-bye rituals. I left my kitchen leftovers with Mr C and Mr C, books with the future Dr Kata. The printer went to a student friend of Kevin Translator’s and next time I’ll throw in an extra ink cartridge. Besides the church and the cemetery, that last week also contained a final trip to the City Archives, thanks to an irresistible prod from the cousins in Vienna.

Letter from Vera, May 2018:

Dear Eileen!

How are you?

I have a few questions. Did I understand you correctly: Lipot had several houses built, and where he got the money from is unclear, but probably from the bank where he worked and also from his wife Sarolta, who brought a house into the marriage.

Do you suspect or know that he sold part of the apartments? I suppose by definition today, Lipot was also a real estate developer. Do you know which architects built the houses? Do you know anything about the properties on which they stand? I do not want extra work for you, but ask if you see these things, along the way. In connection with the family history, I also consider reading a bit about Budapest in the early days, I am still looking for the right title. If I find more, I’ll tell you.

All the best, Vera

In my reply I said:

I am full of long days and lots to do, in my precious last days here. I really do not want to leave. I wish I lived here. (Well maybe not in the winter…) … Now – to business! About the buildings – I have questions about the Kardos property development career, like you too. It’s an area in need of research, although most must wait until the next visit. Your questions are good, they encourage me. Tomorrow I go again to the architecture department of the Budapest City Archives. I already found some of the documents when Lipot and Sarolta bought things, but not when they sold them. That’s what I wonder about.

Today there was no more ordering of documents, but photographing what I had. The story so far:





Krisztina korut, Buda, BP I (a four-storey apartment block, like the others)


Lipot and Sarolta bought the land with a loan from a bank in 1890. That was a long document, which I did not get 100 per cent translated, only enough to know that much. Maybe he got the loan from the bank where he worked? They built on this land in 1894. I was told by the archivists that this was according to the start of the lengthy documents. From that, I at least knew that they had bought land and erected the building, which appeared to be over a dozen flats.

I assumed they took rent from tenants. They lived there too for a while, from 1894 to 1898. I wanted to see if and when they sold it, but those documents were missing from their folder.





Vorosmarty street 58, BP VI


This was bought in 1894. I sent the cousins a copy of the contract of sale. There was another nearly illegible paper, which might be when they sold it in 1906, but that’s not clear. What was clear was that they did not build it. They lived there from 1898 until 1907, after which there was a two-year stint at Kalman 23, V. Also, Frida was here, about 1902–04, while she was between marriages. I assume all three kids were in tow.





Sziv street 54, BP VI


This is the building Sarolta inherited from her mother. Sarolta’s oldest daughter Roza lived here most of her long life until 1945. Roza’s daughter Margit lived there all her life, and her four siblings lived there until they married. Related documents to do with this building were missing from the late 1930s to the middle of the 1950s. By the way, that’s true of all the other houses here, and also of thousands of other examples from this time, I was told. To me that suggested nothing was sold, but rather, confiscated.





Lipot korut 15, BP V


This is where Sarolta moved after Lipot died in 1912. She lived here until her death in 1935. Her son Markus was here with her until at least 1918, and granddaughter Jolan was here until she married in 1927. There were few documents about this flat or this building. It could have been a rented flat. I found no clues.

This came from Andreas: “I find it interesting that among the new documents, one is finally in Italian. However, it is marked as coming from Koper, or Capodistria. When Jolan spoke of Nagyi [Sarolta], she always pretended Lipot and Sarolta lived in Rome, Italy. Funny.”

He was referring to a fond family legend that the GGPs lived in Rome, while Lipot worked for an Italian-Hungarian bank. Legend even said a daughter was born on the train returning to Vienna. We certainly wanted someone to have been born in Italy, but it doesn’t look that way. Lipot and Sarolta lived in San Remo, that’s documented, but I doubt anyone was born on a train. “Dead story,” Andreas said, the journalist’s closing of a file.

He continued:

From all that you have found, it seems the great-grandparents were real estate brokers too! Annoying, I thought to ask Jolan, either visiting her in Hungary or when she was several times with us in Vienna. It got omitted. Too bad.

So, I have a cousin, and that this cousin was here in Vienna, and now it’s funny and unreal that you’ll suddenly be 12,000 kilometres away. What a pity.

Bon voyage, and hope to see you in the spring.

Your loving cousin, Andreas.





Dudas Day


I now crossed the Danube while also crossing over from Grandpa Eugene to Grandma Anna’s Dudas branch of the tree. She was not a Budapester, but a country girl. I was shooed away from the illustrious Castle Hill National Archives because we were not titled aristocracy. “We don’t do plebs” was the tone, although admirably polite, almost British. Everyone else’s records, they explained, were in another branch an hour away, to the north in district III, also known as Obuda.

Gossip detour: Great-Aunt Lujza, Olga’s mother, lived up there around 1918, maybe when her husband was away in the army. But now, back to our story:

The Dudas Day Outing was a foray to the outer suburbs, at the end of loveably rickety Tram Line 1, where I somehow found the right bus north that continued until I was sure I was wrong. Then I got out in a flat residential area, in the middle of which was a vast aeroplane hangar, where I arrived in confusion. That gargantuan structure housed much of the paperwork of the Hungarian nation – things not kept in local archives, due to complicated regulations I cannot understand or explain.

Every member of staff was sweet, kind and competent, but I did not gain much new information. While Kardos melodrama flowed like the Danube, Dudas people left few traces. I got photocopies of documents confirming everything Mom once told me about Dad’s parents. Yes, this is where his mom was from. Yes, she left as a teen. Yes, most of her people stayed in that area. But yes, a few of them left, as she did, for the USA. Later I learned some were in Ohio, then the largest Hungarian population outside of Hungary. Grandma Anna stayed in New York City, married Eugene, and the rest is our history.

Her dad remarried and had another family. She had an aunt, her dad’s sister, also named Anna Dudas. That Anna had twins, named Anna and Maria. I mention this because twins run in our family, as I’ve heard twins are genetically inclined to do. Grandma Anna was a twin too, and we’ve produced others. Sometimes our pregnant womenfolk are extra nervous as a result.





Random surprise: Jeanetta


Sarolta was not the oldest of seven siblings, but of eight. Jeanetta slotted in as number three in their running order, between brothers Armin – who died the day after his brother Miksa’s wedding day – and said Miksa of the many daughters plus surprise son Oszkar, a bit later. Her marriage prenup declared lawyer Karoly Weiser as notary. Present were Jeanetta and her father Mano Spitzer, a clothing trader and resident in the VI, offering his approval of Simon “Garomos” Weisz as the groom, who worked as a tanner and lived in BP III on Ujlak street. The witnesses were Ignatz Fischer, a traveller, and Klerman Kohn, a hat trader. Jeanetta was twenty-two and Simon was thirty. Then, just when it got interesting, things became illegible – as well as possibly in German, but we could not tell.

If you ever do genealogy work, be prepared for this sort of dead end. Forget the frustration and go have some tea or beer, accordingly. There is little else to do. I am appreciative that some details were there. We now had a clothing trader, a tanner, a traveller and a hat seller. I didn’t know that. It was Mano’s wife Johanna who gave the Sziv street house to Sarolta. Therefore, it was sounding more and more like Mano the smart clothing seller married upwards.





Lujza Spitzer, aka Mrs Salamon Nagy


This 1908 prenuptial agreement identified Dr Salamon Nagy as resident at Akaca street 5, district VII, now a greasy kebab shop, while Lujza was living nearby with her parents Miksa and Szidonia on Dohany street. Lujza and her family lawyer had an interesting interpretation of what a dowry should be. The agreement stated clearly that her family would deliver the dowry of 20,000 korona, in cash, to her private savings account, where it would remain in her name and hers alone throughout the marriage. She could make withdrawals from it at any time, and it would be completely separate from their common funds and joint accounts.

When there was a change, it required proper documentation. If she felt it was not safe, she could take it all back, and needed no approval to do so. Also, if she took money out, she needed to pay it back in, at some point (as a precaution against it all being spent). On the other hand, all income, whether his or theirs, would be shared, but not inheritances or gifts.

Those Spitzer girls cut a mean deal. On the same theme of wheeling and dealing, Lujza, Salamon and four other people were on a 1918 document for a property sale. There was a confusingly long list of names and addresses.

Much later in life, in 1934, the couple were part of a Fact Certification document. They were still at the family place on Dohany street. Lujza’s dad Miksa died in 1930, so they were in the family flat. Her mother Szidonia died sometime after 1928, but I do not know when. If she were still alive, she’d likely be living there too. In this document, the couple said they lived there by choice. They wanted to be there, nothing was forced, it was by their own will. That sounded strained and strange. Why declare that? Something odd was afoot. It said something about a National… some kind of company name, illegible. There were document, account and company registration numbers. There was an account book, and a note that these were governmental, not private books. What did that mean? It looked like they were declaring the worth of their company. Was this another state takeover?

Something illegible was delivered in 1916, but the main date was 1934. Did the government “buy” their business the same way that it “bought” Lili’s house, i.e. under duress and for a pittance?





Sarolta’s youngest sister Fani


Kindnesses abound on many of the genealogy sites I joined. A very distant connection sent me this obituary of Fani Spitzer Stern. “Jozsef Stern, with a heart full of sorrow, broken hearted, is here to announce that his beloved wife, Fani, on the 23rd of this month, after a long sickness, has died, at age 43, in the year 1910. The burial will be at the Kozma Cemetery. Mourners: Mano her father; Sarolta her sister; Miksa her brother; Lipot the brother-in-law; Szidonia the sister-in-law; other in-laws, nieces and nephews.”

This answered in the sad negative my often-repeated question, did they have kids? Jozsef had an astounding number of siblings and the contrast may well have been painfully ironic. We went to the grave where Fani was buried in 1910, and Jozsef joined her in 1944. It was so overgrown it was impossible to access. No stone was visible at all. I waved respect from a distance.





Jolan’s place on Barat street


I rediscovered this by funny accident. The plan was, at the end of another blindingly long day at a desk, to have a long walk. Every evening, I chose from a list of favourite routes, and trotted on unconscious auto-pilot. The route didn’t matter since physical exercise itself was the destination. Favoured was any large invigorating circle including food.

This time, leaving the building, the moment my foot hit pavement, an idea sprang up: “No, not the usual route. Go somewhere new.” In the opposite direction was the VIII, allegedly a suspect area and more crime-ridden. It was daylight. I decided to live dangerously. A lovely surprise was in store before I even got near there.

Perhaps an unconscious memory from last year led me down a series of tiny streets where, inexplicably, my heart was beating faster. The corner sign said Barat street. This was where Jolan lived after the war in 1945, where Andreas went after release from the concentration camp, where Vera went as an adventurous teen in the 1960s, where they slept with their feet under the piano. I found it almost sleepwalking, and with this surprise came emotional choking up.

When I found this address last year, Jolan was just another name I was trying to remember, among hundreds, found on documents and still a mystery. This year, after talking to Andreas and Vera, I almost felt I’d met her. So, with that in mind, as they fell on that street sign, my eyes filled with tears trying to say hello to cousin Jolan, as one piano teacher to another, and as another fond fan of Olga neni.

If I’d been able to find the elderly Jolan back in 1977, and if she’d spoken any English (unlikely), I’d have tried to help, buy her groceries, do things around her flat – and I sense she’d have said “No thanks” and waved it away. If I could have visited, I’d have asked who her favourite composers were and what her students were like? We’d have had a fine afternoon, talking music, and I’d have brought luxury cookies.

I photographed the street and her old flat from every possible angle, to send to the cousins in Vienna. I stumbled into some beautiful murals I’d never seen before, and, best of all, I finally located a long-sought second-hand clothing shop, where the raincoat I needed fell into my hands at a bargain price. With that good omen, I went home, and the good news wasn’t over. That evening, another cherry on the cake was a party to celebrate Mr C’s birthday and Mr C’s Hungarian residency card plus new job. Last year’s party was excellent, and this year they outdid themselves. Their pals were more numerous and even more varied, lively and fun. I had a great time, didn’t care or notice what time I got home, and woke up at noon. The last time I did that was decades ago, and even in my youth, I was not the sturdiest partier. So, for one night, I was an old dog remembering old tricks very well. I woke up smiling, and even got to the Farmers’ Market before it closed to get my week’s supply of chilli sauce from Mr Nice Guy. I learned this market just today banned all plastic bags, making it a fine ending to a fine weekend.

Responding to my photos of Barat street, Andreas remembered his neighbours with wit and warmth.

Yes, I remember Barat street. Jolan lived at number 10, on the ground floor. She lived opposite the caretaker couple, Meszaros. He was Polish, the first WWI prisoner in Russia, spoke some Russian, breathed Communism a bit. When the Russians came, he stood by his front door to welcome the alleged comrades. They returned his greeting while stealing his leather jacket off his back. After that, he was not so pro-Communist.

On the first floor lived the Kovacs family. Very, very friendly, nice people. He was managing director of the hospital (Poliklinika). Jolan and I were often invited to their home. They were opposite the Belaks, both actors in the theatre. One floor above lived a German lady Jolan often spoke to. From this I know she behaved very decently in bad times. Another floor up lived Eva Bornemissza, a young actress. During the German occupation, she hid Hilda Gobbi, a famous actress, with her. Hilda was a Communist. After the war, Eva worked with the State Theatre.

Jolan’s friend in the house opposite was Iren, and husband. She was a photographer, he was an accountant and a Social Democrat. After the war she moved to Tatra street, and he became director of the National Bank. Their son went to war and survived, but on the first day, hostilities ended in Budapest, he was killed by a rebounding bullet.

Jolan was still friends with Marsha Fekete, a Communist and party worker. I submitted my application for membership in 1946, but by the time I got it in 1948, I no longer wanted it, and sent it back.

So much for Barat street.

Love, Andreas

By the time I left Budapest, I was reluctant to. We all hoped the elders would be OK next year for Andreas’s ninetieth birthday. All going well, I will be there, for sure.

Sweetest memory: I caught Andreas napping during the day, which he swore he never did. He was curled up in an armchair, and awoke like a child with a smile. Before his clever, sardonic, professorial side could kick in, he blurted out, “I am so happy you found us! And, after I am gone, you will have more family in your future. This is very good, very good!” That made me happy and weepy. This has all been profoundly fulfilling, nicely wacky, and altogether one of the best projects of my life.

It’s worth remembering the well-wisher who also went to Hungary, found history but no living relations, yet found enough friends to return every year. If you go ancestry-hunting, no one can promise you will find living relatives, but certainly, surprises await you. Old gossip is still good gossip. But, take heed of what it says on the website for MACSE, the Hungarian Society for Family History Research: “If you come to this website accidentally, leave as fast as possible, before it is too late! For once you get involved in family research, there is no escape anymore.”

And so, as my motto goes, go shake your apple tree, so miles away, oranges fall down. Obviously one encounters obstacles on the trail of any dream. It’s another matter when a dream is forgotten. I am grateful I remembered mine. I hope your forgotten dreams wake up too.



During this journey, many touching moments misted up my eyes. The very best was at the very end. At the airport, at the last key threshold, a boyishly handsome young man checked my passport, and handed it back, smiling. I thanked him very much, in my best and only Hungarian. He smiled all the more, asking, “Do you speak Hungarian?”

“No, only a little.”

“Your name Kardos is very Hungarian.”

“Yes. My grandparents came from here.”

Now the smile was all warmth and teeth, way beyond the call of duty.

“Very nice!” he said. “Please, come home again soon.”

*** END OF THIS TEXT Noodle Trails 2: My Secret Century in Budapest ***
 
 