Title:My Life with Ndoto: Exploring Africa in a Forty-Year-Old Land Rover
Author:O'Kane, Teresa
Gender of Author:Female
Publication Year:2019
Publisher:N/A
Publication Year of the Edition Used:2019
Publisher of the Edition Used:N/A
Index Number:B149
Source Link:https://www.amazon.com/-/ko/dp/1672091519/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=

*** START OF THIS TEXT My Life with Ndoto: Exploring Africa in a Forty-Year-Old Land Rover ***
ONWARD
Since our first time there in 1981, I longed to explore Africa in my own vehicle. “Like that one,” I’d say from a broken-down seat in a cramped bush taxi while pointing at a built-to-last, fully-kitted-out, long-wheelbase expedition Land Rover. I proclaimed the lucky passengers inside “Different Drummers.” People who were romantic, adventurous, and brave. They were free. They could drive from Cape Town to Cairo, or all the way to London, or completely around the world if they wanted to. If they could do it, why couldn’t I?
I pictured myself in the driver’s seat of every old Landy we came across. I counted jerry cans and spare tires. I wondered what was in the pantry and how they kept their gin cold. If there was a rooftop tent, I wanted to change places immediately. Even asleep, with a trail of drool stuck to my cheek, I too would be romantic, adventurous, and brave in such a tent.
People who knew me already thought me brave. In 2005, my husband and I transited Africa by overland truck and bush taxi. It took us ten months and cost us two bouts of malaria, a few stints as involuntary incubators for insects that laid eggs in our feet, and one mugging at knifepoint, but it paid us back tenfold, mostly due to the people we met. People who took the time to ask why we were there, or let us play with their children, or invited us to a church service. We found that most Africans were just like us. They wanted to be productive and to have a worthwhile life. They wanted their families to be healthy and happy, to have clean drinking water, access to education, and they wanted good governance. It was an eye-opening adventure of a lifetime. There was only one thing missing: the flexibility, relative safety, and comfort of owning our own vehicle.
“We need our own wheels,” I would say to Scott after another challenging day getting from point A to point B on bush taxis in Africa.
It’s a good day when your dreams come into focus.
One evening in the den of our home in San Jose, California, my husband browsed the Internet as he sometimes did while watching television. As the tune to Final Jeopardy played out, he turned his laptop in my direction. “Like this one?” he asked without preface.
The photo on the screen displayed a forty-year-old Series III Land Rover for sale in Cape Town, South Africa. It so perfectly represented my dreams of independence and passport to adventure, that my heart skipped a beat the same way it does when you set eyes on your soul mate for the first time.
“Oh my. Let’s buy it.” And because serendipity should never be shunned or set aside, I switched to more urgent eBay speak, “Bid now, Scott. Buy It Now!”
The timing was right for another expedition to Africa. We didn’t have a real estate project going, our families were happy and healthy, and the exact Landy of my mind’s eye was for sale on the right continent.
“There are two jerry cans for extra petrol,” I said, quickly reading the fine print. “No rooftop tent, but the rack looks like it could hold one.” I perused the photos and read further into the description. “Listen to all the stuff it has: cooking gear, plates, cutlery, gas stove, cool box, tools, and spares. All it needs is a rooftop tent,” I said, more romantic, adventurous, and brave by the minute. Plus, I had a sudden urge to go to the bathroom. “Gut feelings” are a real thing with me. Whenever I get super excited about something, my guts are the first indication that something is meant to be. My fate has often been sealed in a loo.
We made the deal with the owners and named the Land Rover Ndoto (en-doe-toe), the Swahili word for “dream.” We sent half the money. The balance would be paid in Cape Town, South Africa at the end of their safari and the beginning of ours, four months hence. Time enough to tie up loose business ends and ponder our itinerary. The first order of business was finding the right tenant for our one-hundred-year-old home. We did that when we were going away for more than a few months. This time we’d planned to be gone for at least a year.
I love old things (cars, people, dogs), and I love my old house too. It is a grand old house that we lease out fully furnished including wine glasses, plates, pots, pans, and books, so it takes time finding the right tenant.
Three months passed, then four. Without a tenant in place or a flight booked, we wired the rest of the money owed for the Land Rover. Ndoto was now ours. But she could not stay where she was parked in Cape Town indefinitely.
Enter two angels, Karl and Mandy Nutt. We first met the Nutts when we were passengers on their overland truck from Cairo to Nairobi in 2010. When we told them about our predicament, Karl arranged to have Ndoto delivered to Jembjo’s, Karl and Mandy’s guesthouse in the resort town of Knysna on the Garden Route four hundred kilometers from Cape Town.
Time dragged on. There was interest in our home but potential renters wanted it either for several years or only for a few months. Then Scott’s mom had a stroke. A few weeks later, his stepmom had a stroke too. Then his father was diagnosed with terminal cancer. His mom’s health continued to decline, ultimately becoming overshadowed by dementia, the most horrible disease of all. We considered canceling the trip and selling Ndoto.
Karl and Mandy wouldn’t hear of it. They had driven the length and breadth of Africa together and understood this dream better than anyone. They offered to keep Ndoto until we could get to South Africa, whenever that would be. “This too shall pass,” they reminded us. They looked after Ndoto like she was their own and kept her safe behind gates in their driveway. Like a good uncle, Karl kept her clean, sent photos, arranged insurance, executed repairs, and suggested improvements.
Almost a year went by. Scott flew to North Carolina to spend time with his father, who passed away a few weeks later. We were more conscious than ever that dreams shouldn’t be put off indefinitely or it may be too late to live them. We weren’t getting any younger and Ndoto was taking up valuable real estate in the driveway of Karl and Mandy’s guesthouse for far too long.
A week later, serendipity stepped in again. The head coach of the Broncos basketball team at the nearby Santa Clara University, his lovely wife, and their two little boys—ideal tenants—fell in love with our home.
“Whoopee!” said the boys, when they discovered our hammock slung between two trees.
“This patio looks like a great place to enjoy a glass of wine,” said the wife.
“We love old houses,” said the dad doing a layup to the basketball hoop in the driveway.
We were finally on our way to South Africa.
I WANT TO LOOK AT YOUR HOOTERS
Our brains were mush. The days leading up to our departure had been hectic. Moreover, jet lag after twenty-four-hours of travel made us loopy, and loopy-brained is not a good way to start an overland expedition in Africa.
We both suffer horribly from jet lag, but in Cape Town we found the perfect spot to reset our body clock. Between naps on the rooftop terrace of our guesthouse, we gazed at Table Mountain with Fat Bastard, a respectable and easy on the budget South African wine. By day three, jet lag symptoms were replaced by mild hangovers. But we felt switched on, in the travel groove, and ready to take on the rest of Africa. We boarded a bus and seven hours later, we arrived at Ndoto’s foster home. Butterflies swirled in my stomach. I was anxious to meet Ndoto and to see Karl and Mandy again.
It was love at first sight. I cried. Scott kicked the tires.
Karl handed us the keys and said, “Take her for a spin.”
We climbed in.
Scott palmed the stick shift as if he was shaking hands with a new boss. The steering wheel was on the right side, where it was supposed to be but not in a place we had ever experienced as drivers. Driving on the left side of the road was going to be tricky as well.
Scott examined the dashboard. “Fuel gauge reads empty.”
“Yeah, that doesn’t work,” Karl said. “But I’m pretty sure there’s petrol in the tank.”
Scott started her up. An anticlimactic sixty seconds later we were facing the wrong direction in the middle of the road, out of gas.
We pushed Ndoto to the curb and fed her petrol from a jerry can. Then we drove around pretty little Knysna, trying to stay in the left lane. We avoided one-way streets thinking for some reason that would be too confusing. I overlooked every defect—the rusty chassis, the broken gauges, the leaky windows, and the aged bench seat containing a foam cushion that was completely devoid of cush and began mentally outfitting her for our needs.
“She’ll need a back seat,” I said because it was my plan to offer rides to people in need along our route.
“A back seat? How about a new front seat? My ass is already numb,” Scott said.
Any forty-year-old vehicle would need tinkering before it would be fit to drive on African roads for a year, and Ndoto was no exception. The next day, Karl introduced us to his neighbor, Hein, who introduced us to Neil, the mechanic at VIP Motors. Neil agreed to perform an inside and underside once-over of our vehicle.
Ndoto was so high up on a lift that Karl, Scott, Hein, Neil, and I could walk underneath her to examine her age-encrusted belly. For a while, no one spoke. I broke the silence.
“Obviously, her beauty lies in her simplicity.”
I received blank stares from Hein and Neil. Karl smiled.
Scott said, “Tris, you are very loyal.”
Hein and Neil moved slowly under Ndoto speaking in Afrikaans and touching her lightly all over as if afraid they’d bruise her. Like doctors of gerontology, they made their diagnosis, adding with considerate compassion, “But that is due to the normal aging process of course.” Neil pointed to worn, leaky, and rusty areas while his mechanic jotted down on two pages the various treatments required. They ran their fingers over oozing fluids, wiggled the wheels, examined the springs, kept anything flammable well away from the fuel tank, and ignored the exhaust system because it was so obviously in need of a complete overhaul. The brakes disappointed, and the bearings growled.
At the completion of the examination, Neil made a comment in Afrikaans, and everyone laughed.
“What did he say?” I asked Hein.
“He said that you should buy another Land Rover and tow it behind you for spare parts.”
The next day, Ndoto went back into the shop for a service, including oil change, new filter, and lube. The radiator was flushed, and a replacement fuel tank, a high-lift jack, and various other parts were ordered. Without these, Ndoto wouldn’t pass the Roadworthiness Test required by South Africa. The repairs would happen when the parts arrived, up to three weeks later, or, as South Africans liked to say, “now-now” or “just now.”
Karl also introduced us to Marius, an automotive electrician whose shop was conveniently located just around the corner from Jembjo’s. Marius had a strong Afrikaans accent, so we had to listen intently while he examined aloud all the wires and connections.
Ndoto’s beauty may lay in her simplicity but there are some gadgets every car needs to operate safely. There were loose connections to the windscreen wipers, the taillights, the horn, and a half dozen other spots. “Loose” may be an asset in all-you-can-eat brunch pants, but not in a forty-year-old Land Rover.
When Marius found a functioning 12-volt outlet under the passenger seat, one that could be used to power a portable fridge, he said with awe, “This works. Yes, this is working.” Marius repaired all the connections and then installed a second backup battery under the passenger seat, which would be primarily used for keeping gin cold in a cool box that would sit behind the seat. The other battery, the one under the hood, would be used for starting the car and for keeping gin cold in an emergency.
Once the taillights were lighting and wipers were wiping, Marius stretched, looked at me and said, “And now, I will have a look at your hooter.”
“Uh, what?”
“I can fix your hooter now,” Marius said.
A few moments passed before Scott started chuckling, “Oh, you mean the horn.” Scott informed Marius that where we came from, horns were things that go beep in a car and that breasts were referred to, in some circles, as hooters.
Without missing a beat, Marius said, “In that case, you shall have two,” and he installed a second hooter under the hood.
As was so often the case, the hooters were of unequal size.
BUYING A ROOFTOP BEDROOM
We drove to a town called George to look at a rooftop tent. Scott hoped my passion for rooftop sleeping during our safari wouldn’t show.
“Remember,” Scott said seriously, “don’t get excited. The asking price is way too high. Find flaws. Whatever you do, please Tris, don’t say you love it.”
“I know, I know. Sheesh. I’ll keep quiet while you do the negotiating,” I said as we climbed out of Ndoto and greeted the man who had placed the For Sale ad.
I looked around the yard and spotted the tan and green-colored canvas tent on the roof of a SUV. The tent looked inviting, just like a little house sitting on top of a car. The access to the tent was a barely used aluminum ladder. I could see how the tent and ladder would fold over into a square within the parameters of the roof when not in use. When unfolded, the tent would become the quintessential safari bedroom, at least in my eyes.
“Oh my. It’s perfect. I love it,” I said out loud.
Scott rolled his eyes and said through pursed lips, “Geez, Tris.”
“I heard your Landy coming up the road,” the South African said, using the slang term for Land Rovers with the smug smile of one who owns a Toyota Land Cruiser. Or maybe he was smiling because I’d just clinched the deal for him. He knew I was sold. “Series III, right? They sure aren’t stealthy. What year is it?”
“It’s a 1973. Ndoto may not be stealthy, but she’s strong,” I said defensively.
“Of course she is,” he said, just to be nice.
As soon as he unzipped the rain fly, I climbed up the ladder and into the tent. I could hardly contain my satisfaction. It was the rooftop tent of my dreams.
Scott coughed, probably to muffle the sounds of contentment coming from inside the tent. I hung my head out of the opening to watch Scott do what he did best, while he circled what might be our bedroom for a year. He turned to the owner of the only secondhand Hannibal rooftop tent for sale in a five-hundred-kilometer radius and went into bargaining mode.
“I don’t know if this one will work for us,” Scott said, pulling on his ear lobe. He did another lap.
God, the man had patience. I flopped on my back and stretched out in the idyllic little tent. I sighed and began to imagine our first night sleeping in it.
“I would have to modify the rack on our Landy to make the tent fit,” Scott said, trying to negotiate over my bliss.
“Why are you selling?” Scott asked.
I poked my head out, intrigued to hear why anyone would sell something so perfect.
The owner looked down and kicked at the ground, as if an imaginary tree root or dirt clod needed his attention. I could tell he was stalling. Then he looked at me and no doubt saw that I would still love it no matter what he said, so he told the truth.
“Well, you see, my wife doesn’t like to have to climb down the ladder at night. You know, when she has to relieve her bladder. She’s afraid of snakes.”
Wait a minute. Snakes weren’t in my dream. Snakes terrify me more than hippos, and hippos terrify me a lot. After mosquitoes, which cause the most deaths in Africa on account of the malaria parasite they carry, hippos are one of the most dangerous animals in Africa. But, snakes. Oh man. Snakes are the creatures I fear most. Well, at least he hadn’t mentioned hippos.
“Plus,” the owner said chuckling, “she always thinks there’s a hippo lurking at the bottom of the tent ladder.”
“Whoa,” I said backing out of the tent and climbing down. I hadn’t thought about the need to pee between sundown and sunrise with hippos and snakes. “Would you excuse us a minute?”
Scott and I walked a short distance away to discuss the realities of sleeping under canvas on the roof of our Land Rover in the wild for a year. Despite potential snake encounters, I was still sold on the tent-on-the-roof concept and thought our journey would not be complete without it. Scott wanted to take time to consider other sleeping options. We both agreed that, unlike the previous owners of our Landy, we did not want to sleep inside the car or in a tent on the ground. We stood in silence for a few moments. I didn’t want to give up the idea of sleeping each night of our safari in a rooftop tent.
“Setting up a tent on the ground every night will just be a big hassle,” I said. “And having to take it apart and store it each day will be messy and take up a lot of space inside the car. So, I have an idea. We’ll train our bladders. If we make a practice of not having any liquid after dark, we won’t have to worry about getting up in the night for a pee. How ‘bout it?”
Scott smiled. “Boy, you really want this tent.”
“I do,” I said.
We negotiated a suitable snake-and-hippo discount with the owner and bought the tent. Our dream to explore Africa in an old Land Rover with a rooftop tent was finally a reality.
A LUCY MOMENT
Scott spent most of the next day back in Marius’s driveway using a circular saw to trim a bit of railing off the roof rack, so that the tent would fit. After all the cutting and grinding were done, Karl and Scott removed the rack from the roof of the Landy and carried it back to Jembjo’s. They placed it on the ground, right next to Ndoto. Then, they moved the tent onto six stacks of bricks in the driveway, so they could see where the bolts in the floor of the tent should attach to the rack. The only thing left to do was to permanently affix the tent to the rack and then bolt the rack, with tent attached, to the roof. But Scott and Karl said they wanted a break.
“Time for a beer,” Karl said before disappearing to the back garden with Scott in tow.
I might have heard one of them mention, “Don’t touch the tent.” But there she sat; her walls erect, her zips open, welcoming me with open arms. I couldn’t resist. I leaned my head in and inhaled deeply the aroma of my new bedroom.
I noticed the absence of a stack of bricks under the middle section of the plywood tent floor but decided that wasn’t as important as checking out what would be my bedroom for more than three hundred nights. I stood on tiptoes and lifted my knees one at a time to the edge of the plywood rim. Then, I crept on all fours, as slow as a tortoise, into the tent. I tried to distribute my weight evenly and spread my body flat, as one would when slithering to safety over thin ice. I was just beyond the center of the tent, the part that hinged, and I was in the process of rolling over onto my back, when the tent floor began to slide off the bricks. Suddenly, the tent folded in half, closing around me like a Venus flytrap on a pesky insect. It was a real I Love Lucy moment. I began to laugh. I thought, if someone had been around to record the slow-mo collapse of the tent around me, it would have become a YouTube sensation: “Tent Devours Woman in One Gulp.” And then I thought, Uh oh. I’m trapped.
I poked my face out of the narrow opening. Ricky? Ethel? Anyone?
There wasn’t anything inside the tent to brace my feet against, and the sides were now too steep for me to pull myself out. Plus, I have no muscles. There was no way of escape.
I was just about to swallow my pride and call for help, when Karl and his contractor appeared in the driveway. I wish I could describe the look on their faces. I’d never seen it before. Oh, yes, I had. On Ricky Ricardo and Fred and Ethel Mertz. The contractor disappeared, probably thinking that sticking around would result in more work for him. After trying in vain to pull me out, Karl used his weight to push down on one end of the tent and passed an empty jerry can in to me, which I used as a booster to climb out. Scott, busy recycling beer, missed the entire episode.
I went into the house to tell Mandy (my Ethel) what had happened while Scott, Karl, and Hein bolted the tent to the rack. Then the backpacker guests, made up of Australians, Dutch, South Africans, and one English doctor named Sarah Richardson, lifted the entire heavy rack and tent unit up to the roof of Ndoto. Next, using various almost matching screws, nuts, and bolts, they all helped secure the rack to the frame. I climbed up onto Ndoto’s hood and unfolded the now permanently secured tent. Scott handed up the mattress and bedding. I climbed in and made the bed.
“Very cozy. This will do nicely,” I said with a smile as Scott climbed in to join me.
Karl walked around to where we could see him. “Well, it’s not champagne, but we got you something as a christening present.” He reached in through the driver side window and held up the back of a license plate. When he flipped it over, Scott and I got all choked up. It read “Ndoto.” Karl quickly secured it to a spot above the passenger side door frame.
“Now that she’s properly named, she’s ready to roll,” I said with tears in my eyes. “Thank you, Nutts.”
Hein circled Ndoto, took a sip of beer, and said, “You must move the spare tire from the bonnet (hood), and you must hang it from the rear door.”
“You must” and “you mustn’t” are terms used by South Africans in place of “I suggest” or “You might consider.” As good as the advice usually was, I was growing tired of hearing what I must do. As I used to remind my mother, “I’m the boss of me.” Besides, it had taken several days to get everything where it was, and we were too worn out for any more musts.
Hein took another pull on his beer before he said, “And you must tint the windows on your Landy to discourage smash and grab.”
“Smash and grab?” I asked thinking here was another expression I needed to learn.
“Smash your window and grab your valuables or your biltong.”
“Biltong?”
“Dried meat. That’s why you must tint your windows.”
I found the expressions in South Africa, except for those telling me what I must do, rather charming. One, which I heard twice in one week was “Lord, love a duck,” meaning, “You don’t say” or “What a surprise” or “How in the world did you ever spot that pangolin?” A pangolin is a rarely seen, endangered, nocturnal animal about the size of a large raccoon. It has a tongue so long it begins in its rib cage, and its secret power is the ability to roll up into a tight ball. Not tight enough to stop poachers from capturing and killing a pangolin for the nine hundred scales that cover its body and tail. The scales are made of keratin, the same fibrous protein found in fingernails, just like rhino horn, and have no magical properties whatsoever.
Another expression, “Shame” is delivered almost in a whisper. Shame can be used in place of “What a tragedy,” or “Oops,” or “That really bites,” or “How kind of you.” Examples include: “I lost my job.” – “Shame.” “I spilled my milk.” – “Shame.” “Here, why don’t you borrow my binoculars?” – “Shame.” We once met a woman who never said just “shame.” It was always, “Shame, Daddy,” which I can’t explain at all.
Two of the more confusing expressions are “now, now” and “just now.” I’m pretty sure that “now, now” means immediately. But “just now” can mean later, or twenty minutes, or sometime in the future.
My favorite expression is “Ye-eees.” It means “Yes” but is said with a lot more conviction, enthusiasm, and excitement. When South Africans say, “Ye-eees!” they are bright eyed and smiling broadly—as if their lottery numbers had paid off big, or they had just spotted their first pangolin.
“Shhyo” is similar to “Ye-eees,” but is delivered with a loud exhale. As far as I can tell, it means “Wow,” or “OMG,” or “You said it, buster.” These expressions became so familiar, we began to use them too.
Fraser, Karl and Mandy’s pet Jack Russell, circled the car, as if performing a pre-flight check. Then he jumped in an open door and sat in Ndoto’s driver’s seat. With his mouth open as if he were laughing and his tail slapping the seat beside him, he looked as ready for adventure as we were.
“Shame. Look at Fraser,” Mandy said with pride.
South Africans love their pets more than brandy, and if they have a dog it’s usually a Jack Russell. If we met a South African who didn’t have a dog with them, we’d asked, “Who is taking care of your Jack Russell?” No one ever said, “Shhyo, we don’t have a Jack Russell.” If they had, we would have responded “Shame” because Jack Russells really are the most amazing animals.
“Hein, the only thing I must do is take a shower before the braai tonight,” I said in reply to Hein’s demand that we move the spare tire.
South Africans love to braai (barbeque), though it’s a process that takes several hours. They start with logs and keep adding more logs until they burn down to coals sufficient to roast a warthog. I was usually pretty hungry by the time the meal was ready to eat. While we waited for the logs to produce coals, we drank. Man, can South Africans drink. Not that there’s anything wrong with that. On account of my Irish DNA, this suits me just fine. South Africans drink wine and beer but also Rum and Coke, or Brandy and Coke, or Tequila and Tequila. They eat meat and lots of it. No one can braai like a South African male. It makes my mouth water just thinking about it.
Later, while we waited for the logs to produce the requisite amount of coals needed to feed the masses at Jembjo’s, a fierce storm brewed overhead. The skies looked ominous and a brisk wind whipped through the backyard. I was torn between the warmth and congeniality of Karl and Mandy’s fire pit and a desire to verify the tent’s waterproofing capabilities. Plus, it would be our first night sleeping in our tent, so I was eager for bedtime.
At the first crack of thunder, I waved at Scott across the patio. “I’m going to batten down the hatches.” I ran to the driveway, climbed up on the hood of Ndoto, and dove into the tent, just as the storm unleashed her fury. I snuggled into my little nest. I buried my face in a goose down pillow and wrapped myself like a burrito in the plush duvet. It was the epitome of “cozy.” The tent—and the entire Land Rover—swayed to and fro in the wind and rocked me to sleep.
A little later, after the rain had stopped, I heard Karl call, “Room Service!” He and Scott handed up a serving of the most delicious, mouthwatering meat, with a side of meat, dinner I had ever tasted.
After I’d finished, I hung my body out of the tent opening and set the plate on the hood. As I pulled the duvet around me again, a wave of gratitude washed over me. My heart was full; thinking of all Karl and Mandy had done for us, starting with keeping Ndoto in their driveway when events beyond our control delayed our arrival in Africa. By storing Ndoto, they kept our dream alive. Hein had been helpful in his own way as well.
“I must thank them all in the morning,” I said before falling into a deep, contented sleep.
A TEST DRIVE TO ANGIE’S G-SPOT
The diagnosis of Ndoto were behind us, Marius had done all the tinkering he could, and Easter weekend was upon us. Given that Hein and Karl were present at Ndoto’s trip to the mechanic, I thought it a little surprising when they both suggested that while we waited for parts to arrive, we might enjoy a few days at Angie’s G-Spot, an off-the-beaten-path restaurant and a campsite located in a valley off a steep mountain pass.
“Angie’s G-Spot? Interesting name. How bad is the road?” I asked, thinking about the pothole-ridden route we had taken back from George the day we bought the tent. “Is it worse than Seven Passes Road?”
“It’s worse, yeah, but you’ll make it. It can be cold up at Angie’s, so you must bring an extra blanket,” Hein said.
“I admit that a place called Angie’s G-Spot sounds intriguing, but I’m worried about taking Ndoto on rough or steep roads before she’s ready. Besides that, the high lift jack hasn’t arrived yet. What if we get a puncture? Plus, we’re just getting used to right-hand steering and keep-left driving, and we aren’t good at either yet.” I paused, trying not to sound like a Nervous Nellie. “Wait a minute, isn’t this the same road that you had a spill on with your motorbike a few weeks ago? The steep, gravel road with hairpin turns? The motorbike that’s been in the shop since then?”
“Yeah, but you’ll make it,” Karl said with a smile. “Harold and Angie have a great little place. It’s remote. No electricity. You can set up camp along the river. They have a well-stocked bar and they do meals.”
Neither Scott nor I felt Ndoto was ready to be kicked out of the nest yet, but I admitted it was a good idea to do a test run on unpaved roads.
“Let’s do it, Tris,” Scott said, so off we went.
After thirteen kilometers on a well-maintained gravel road, we came upon a huge vehicle that had just graded it.
“No wonder it didn’t seem so bad,” Scott said as he drove around the machine and hit the first pothole. Then, we climbed . . . and climbed, and turned, and climbed, and slid, and climbed, and accidentally killed the engine, and climbed, and bumped along on one of the most treacherous roads I had ever been on. While Scott kept his arms busy shifting and steering, I practiced speaking Swahili. “Hatari! Danger! Edge. Edge. EDGE,” I said repeatedly. After getting punished by a particularly bad set of potholes, there was a new clunking sound coming from the right front wheel.
Forty minutes later, after we learned that of the three stick shifts poking through the floorboard, the red one was a low range four-wheel drive gear, and the yellow one was a high range gear, I began to relax. Having more gears was confusing, but it meant more options. Ndoto was now making her way up the mountain without stalling, and we hadn’t seen another vehicle since the grader.
Then I began to smell smoke. We rounded a bend to find an entire mountainside completely engulfed in flames. The billowing smoke spread across the valley like storm clouds. And it was windy. The flames jumped and danced and raced up the slopes. It was the first inferno I had ever seen up close. The firestorm was so near that if Ndoto had stalled, I wasn’t sure we could have outrun the flames.
“Maybe we should turn back,” I said and then realized how ridiculous that was. There was no turning back because there was no turning around. The road was too narrow for Ndoto’s eight-point turn demands, so to turn back meant reversing down the mountain. We hadn’t passed a farm or a pullout since leaving the paved highway called the N2 (or as Marius called it, the N-Tuna).
“We’ll make it,” Scott said in a quiet voice.
“I wish everyone would stop saying that,” I said.
Fifteen minutes later, we spotted a red Coca-Cola sign pointing down a rocky driveway to a simple building made of rough hewn lumber. We had arrived at Angie’s G-Spot. We parked and stepped into reception, which doubled as the bar. Porcupine quills, an old gramophone, maps, books, and other collectables and mementos covered every surface and wall of the bar. Harold, the owner, offered cold beers and pointed us in the direction of the river, where we could set up camp.
“Come up later for sundowners and dinner if you’d like. My wife Angie is in town shopping for supplies, but she should be back soon,” Harold said walking us to a deck that fronted the river. A dog named Black and another named Cruiser led the way to the river’s edge.
We set up our chairs and table but stopped short of unfolding the tent because the wind had shifted. The sky became smokier, and a few flakes of ash landed on Scott’s shoulders. Black and Cruiser left. A pig named Chiquila wandered by.
“Oh man. I wonder where this road leads. Maybe we should carry on,” I said more than a little jumpy. “I’ll go ask at the bar if they’ve had any news about the fires.”
I found Harold on the patio smoking some weed, relaxed and calm. “What can I do for you?” he asked.
“Well, I’m a little worried about this fire. Have you heard anything?”
“You’ll be fine. There will be plenty of notice if we need to evacuate.” Then, he said, “Don’t worry, you’ll make it.”
I wished everyone would stop saying that!
“Well, please keep us posted,” I said wondering what would light a fire under Harold, other than an actual fire.
I walked back along the water, checking the depth should it become necessary to lay down in it to escape the flames. But it was more babbling brook than life-saving river. Behind me, storm clouds were building. I found Scott sitting where I had left him, a few more flakes of ash resting on his shoulders.
“Well, I’ve been assured that we have nothing to worry about. Let’s set up our bedroom.”
We had it almost completely set up, me on the roof and Scott at the back securing the fly, when the skies opened up and bombarded us with rain.
“Hooray!” I said. “We have that new clunking noise coming from the chassis, but at least now we don’t have to worry about the fire.”
We stood under the part of the tent that overhung the back of the Landy and waited for the storm to finish. We drank a toast to Hein. He had been the one to tell us that we must secure the tent on the roof in such a way that when opened, it would overhang the rear of the Landy and give us a place to stay dry while cooking.
After the groundskeeper showed us where we could take wood-fired hot showers, we freshened up and walked to the bar to have drinks with Harold and Angie.
“How did you come to own this place,” I asked, adding hesitantly, “and how did it get the name G-Spot?”
“G-Spot doesn’t mean what you think,” Harold said. “Six years ago, we stopped at this spot on the river and Angie just kept repeating, “This is so great. Just great.” So, we set about buying the land and building on this great spot. The ‘G’ stands for ‘Great.’ Today is our five-year anniversary of the opening.”
Scott ordered drinks all around. Five years at the same G-Spot was something to celebrate.
BREAKFAST WITH ELEPHANTS, AND A ROOM WITH A VIEW
I am a lucky woman. From the time I first met him, Scott has always made my birthday special. One birthday was a surprise trip to Paris. Another was spent in Sri Lanka bathing an elephant. Now, another birthday was upon me and as the big day approached, I thought it would be spent not with giraffes or elephants in the bush, but with Land Rover mechanics in the city.
I shouldn’t have worried. Scott, ever resourceful, found a way to get me to where the wild things were. On the famed Garden Route of South Africa, near Knysna, lies Knysna Elephant Park, a sanctuary that nurtures calves who’ve been orphaned due to poaching for ivory or rescued from culls. One of the ways Knysna Elephant Park raises funds is by renting out rooms in a lodge on the reserve. As I soon discovered, Room One had a view unlike any other.
The second-floor suite was tastefully decorated with two comfy-looking chairs, an equally cushy couch, and a luxurious duvet on a king-sized bed. A bottle of wine, made from grapes stomped by an elephant named Harry, sat on a coffee table, and, out of the corner of my eye, a spa tub beckoned. From our balcony, we could watch the resident elephants grazing on the veldt.
Phumeza, the receptionist who showed us to our room, pointed to a six-foot wide sliding window behind the couch. “This is the only room that offers this feature. You can watch the elephants all night long from the comfort of your bedroom, if you want to.”
“Oh, I want to, that’s for sure,” I said walking over to the open window and looking out.
Below me was the sleeping area for the elephants. At any time during the night, I could perch on the back of the couch and watch Sally the matriarch and eight other elephants eating, trumpeting, sleeping, and snoring. I was overcome with emotion. When tears ran down my cheeks Phumeza smiled, happy to see my appreciation of room number one.
“You see, it’s my birthday, and elephants are my favorite earthly beings,” I said.
Phumeza smiled at Scott and made her exit.
Later, from the tub, I heard Scott say, “Tris, you’ve got to come see this.”
I toweled off, dressed, and joined him in a small common area adjacent to our suite. From there, the other lodge guests could watch the elephants sleeping at night too, though not in their birthday suits like I could. Below me was a three-week-old baby elephant named Fiela. Rejected by her mother (how could she?), still unsteady on her feet, and smaller than a St. Bernard dog, she pranced and played and followed her keepers around like a drunken sailor. I waited as long as I could before I called down to one of Fiela’s surrogate mothers.
“Would it be alright if I come down to see the baby elephant?”
Jenny, a volunteer from Canada, looked up and grinned. “Are you the guests in Room One? A guide must accompany you, but yes, it’s possible.”
I immediately went on the hunt for a guide. I found Geoffrey who was busy with guests at the time, but said, “Yes, I will find you just now.”
Twenty minutes later, Geoffrey found me waiting at the entrance to Fiela’s play area. The tiny baby elephant careened about the room like a marble in a pinball machine. She seemed in a hurry to take in everything at once. She pulled the trouser leg of her favorite keeper, Laurie, begged for a bottle of milk, played with a rag doll, and then backed up onto my lap and pooed, all within ten seconds. It was a thin, milky poo that soaked into my jeans and onto my thigh. That duty out of the way, Fiela found Scott and sucked his thumb.
Thirty minutes later, I was completely sated; high on a baby elephant.
When I found Geoffrey to thank him, he said, “You’ve seen the baby. Would you like some interaction with the adult elephants?”
After my time with Fiela, I was spent. But I also didn’t want to miss an opportunity, so I said yes. Geoffrey led the way to a room where we watched a short video of the dos and don’ts—don’t bend down, don’t run, do enjoy—before boarding a tram pulled by a tractor. In the distance, we could see ten elephants gathering behind a six-foot-high rail. They must have sensed that treats in the form of apples, squash, and carrots were imminent.
As we arrived and walked toward the fence, the elephants stretched their trunks toward us, reaching for tidbits from our small pails that were filled with fruits and vegetables. The matriarch, Sally, grasped nibble after nibble from my palm with finger-like muscles at the end of her trunk and gobbled them up like Pac-Man clearing a maze, or like my niece Clare eating popcorn in a theater when she was little, one by one and rapidly. I could hardly keep up. Later, we walked with the elephants across a field to their sleeping area in the large barn-like building adjacent to our room.
The elephants at Knysna Elephant Park have a vast range in which to roam, and they are safe from poachers—at least safer than they would be in the wild. They seemed content. But I wished I’d said no to the interaction with the adult elephants, at least to the part where we fed them. It wasn’t lost on me that but for the generosity and dedication of the owners, donors, and volunteers, these animals might be dead. But I thought it wasn’t necessary for the elephants to have to wait patiently, like begging dogs, for tidbits from humans. It was enough for me to know they were well taken care of without the photo op. Nonetheless, I still looked forward to watching the elephants from my bedroom, when they were unaware of my presence.
I barely slept a wink that night. Instead, I sat at the open window in our room so I could hear and observe the elephants. I liked that I could see them, but they couldn’t see me.
Around 8:00 p.m., the keepers brought in bundles of freshly cut leafy tree limbs for the elephants to eat. After they finished eating, the elephants stood around pooing. A few times, in unison, all ten elephants flared their ears slightly and froze, perhaps listening to distant elephant communication. Elephants use infrasound to communicate within a range of six kilometers or more. These remarkable animals also glean information through their feet, seismically sensing the activities of elephants or even weather patterns, vast distances away. I’d witnessed this behavior by elephants on several occasions in different parts of Africa. It was always remarkable to see an entire herd of elephants suddenly stand stock-still at the same moment.
Around midnight, the elephants all began to lay down on their sides to sleep.
“Come here. You have to see this,” I said to Scott who was reading on the bed.
We watched the elephants, one by one, kneel and sink down on their personal nests of sawdust and bits and pieces of leftover tree branches. We went to bed as well, but I wanted to be up before the elephants woke in the morning. All through the night I stumbled half asleep over to the window to check on the ellies. I was surprised at how deeply they slept. I guessed it was because they were without the worries of an elephant in the wild; safe from poaching with reliable access to food and water.
Their morning routine was even more enchanting than at bedtime. They woke leisurely and took their time stretching before rising, the way a dog or cat would with shoulders hunched, head tucked, and all four legs extended to their limit. It was contagious. Without thinking, I stretched my legs and arms as well.
When it was time to leave, I bid farewell to Fiela. Elephants are fragile at that age, so I hoped this special little elephant would make it to adulthood.
We phoned Karl who told us that the high lift jack had still not arrived, so we decided to drive another thirty kilometers east along the famed Garden Route to Plettenberg Bay. Plett, as it is known, is a clean, well-organized resort town with kilometers of beaches, summer homes, golf courses, restaurants, and twelve polo fields. “The playground of the rich, The Riviera of Africa” bragged one accommodation-booking site. It was stunning. When the Portuguese first set eyes on it, they called it Bahia Formosa, Beautiful Bay. Fortunately, there was a range of accommodations from luxurious to laid-back to be had in Plett.
We camped in the garden of an upscale hostel (only in Plett is there such a thing). Even the backpackers staying there looked affluent. I thought the only reason the owners let us camp there was because they liked the way Ndoto looked parked in front of the hostel, under a palm tree near a flower bed. I did too. The best part about the hostel was that it was located only one block from the best place I’d eaten breakfast in Africa, Le Fournil, The Bakehouse.
Each morning, I went to the counter and ordered the same thing. “I’ll have the Norwegian breakfast. Extra Scandinavian, please.” No one ever laughed.
“Tris,” Scott said in his please-stop-talking voice.
“What? Ordering it Extra Scandinavian gets me more salmon,” I said with a grin.
Norwegian breakfast consists of smoked salmon and the fluffiest scrambled eggs known to the universe, set atop a freshly baked buttery croissant, with a cappuccino and bagel on the side. And I did get a lot of salmon.
While we ate, we rated the cosmetic surgery outcomes of the elite clientele comprised of thin, well-dressed, mostly blonde, tight-skinned women wearing diamond rings the size of my bagel. Every few minutes they touched their lips to rims of skinny lattes. My thighs and I cursed them for diluting the enjoyment of my one-thousand-calorie Norwegian breakfast.
“I won’t be getting this north of the Limpopo,” I said to Scott, justifying the calories while biting into my carbs with gusto.
The other thing that made Le Fournil the ideal stop for breakfast was its high-speed Internet. Ndoto would soon be fit to travel roads north of the Limpopo River, the border between South Africa and the rest of Africa, and we still had an itinerary to plan. Having the World Wide Web at our disposal would come in handy because before we left South Africa, we wanted to go back to school. We needed to learn all we could about the flora and fauna of wild Africa; to know more about animal behavior, and what to do when we encountered these animals in the wild. Since we planned on rough camping in the bush along the way, the more we knew about our surroundings, the better and safer our experience would be.
“Let’s find some nature courses,” Scott said clearing the table and pulling out his laptop.
Between sips of coffee (okay, yes, and another bagel), we went to work researching nature and field guide courses in the area.
Narrowing our search to Ulovane Environmental Training School, we sent a booking inquiry. As Scott clicked send, Karl phoned us to say that the parts were in.
Driving back to Knysna, we talked about what we would learn in the coming weeks and about all the wild places Ndoto would take us to after the course was over. I was looking most forward to sleeping night after night amongst the animals—above them, out of harm’s way, safe and cozy—in our rooftop tent.
Back in Knysna, the parts were installed and we, including Ndoto, were ready to go. We smothered Karl and Mandy in hugs and drove off to Ulovane in the Eastern Cape.
SPOORS – NOT TO BE CONFUSED WITH S’MORES
It only took a few hours at Ulovane to make us glad we enrolled. Everything we would learn would make us safer in the wild.
At first, we spent a lot of time in a classroom. We studied reproduction cycles and weaning ages. We memorized the size and weight of dangerous animals. We learned their charging speeds and that we could never hope to outrun any of them. We observed what they ate, how much they slept, and what their footprints looked like in sand, mud, and on smooth, hard substrate.
Then there was the training module called, “Encountering Dangerous Game on Foot.” Even the title made my heart pound. With armed mentors, we walked in wildlife areas with what is known as the Big Five: lion, leopard, rhino, elephant, and Cape buffalo. Dangerous game also included hippos and whatever else could kill us in the bush.
Before we did any walking in the wild, we had to have a few weeks of firearm training. I learned how to handle a rifle with a caliber big enough to stop a lion or a Cape buffalo in its tracks. After a week of firearm classroom study, we moved to a long-distance shooting range. Using a .308 rifle with a scope, we had to hit a bull’s eye at one hundred meters. I surprised myself. I was a pretty good shot.
We experienced the unbearable pain of pepper spray when our instructor fired a short blast in an enclosed space. “…so that you think twice before you use it,” he said. “Use it if you have to, but it’s important that you know what you are doing to someone.” A little went a long way. When the fumes hit me, the pain in my eyes and lungs was excruciating and left me gasping for air.
Our first few encounters with Big Five were at a reserve called Shamwari, which means “friend” in Zulu. We met our mentor, Andrew Kearney, who drove us eight kilometers to a dry streambed situated in dense thicket. Perfect leopard territory, I thought as we descended to the dry creek, high-stepping over boulders while carrying armloads of firewood. In a small clearing, we found an old geezer (water tank) and a rustic camp with two fire pits. Around a bend and just through the trees, a narrow path led to a long drop toilet. To my relief, a makeshift closet surrounded the hole in the ground. We sat around a fire pit while Andrew gave a rundown of how things would go over the next few days.
“We’ll take our first walk this afternoon. Shamwari is massive and you only have a few days to get your required encounters, so we don’t have much time to waste.” He paused, looking around at the site. “It’s very important that you are switched on, aware, at all times. You must arrange amongst yourselves a schedule to sit watch each night. This area is active with animals. Two nights ago, a pride of fifteen lions slept here.”
“Whoa,” I said gauging the distance from the sleeping area to the long drop.
That night, when not on watch, most everyone spooned around the glowing fire pits in sleeping bags.
We walked in the mornings and afternoons in the bush. Lions charged us. Rhinos sniffed us from a distance. A curious giraffe peered at us, seeming to wonder what we found so interesting about his footprints.
At night, we slept under the stars and took turns sitting watch in pairs. There are few things in life more thrilling for me than being awake in the African bush in the middle of the night. Scott and I took the 2:00 a.m. watch.
I could only see what glowed in a three-foot radius around the fire. We had headlamps but turned them on only when we heard, or imagined we heard, the sound of twigs breaking nearby. I mostly sat by the fire, feeding it, poking it, and putting a pot of water on the coals to boil for no other reason than to have something to do while listening to the sounds of pitch-black Africa. We started our shift with eyes wide open on high alert, whispering every few minutes, “Did you hear that?” But by the end of the two-hour watch, it was difficult for me to keep my eyes open. I could see how people could become complacent and wake up dead.
We each had a chance to lead the group on a bush walk, which meant we carried the rifle, set the pace, and picked the route. Playing the part of lead guide, responsible for the safety of everyone else on a walk in the wild, changed everything for me. When it was my turn, my heart beat faster and my senses heightened. Oddly, time seemed to slow down.
Scott critiqued my performance afterward, saying that I paused every fifty feet or so to point out some small bush, spoor, or flower on the trail. The real reason I paused was so that I could switch the rifle from one hand to the other. A .458 rifle is heavy.
At Africa on Foot, a camp in the Klaserie Private Game Reserve located in Greater Kruger, we exercised our minds and our legs with renowned safari guide Brett Horley. One day in particular started slowly but ended up memorable for all but me.
The first several hours of the walk were too quiet. We hardly saw anything. We strained to hear sounds of guinea fowl kicking up dust or oxpeckers alarm calling. In the absence of sightings, we concentrated on tracking; finding and interpreting the signs and spoor of what had been there earlier.
We followed the tracks of a lion for more than two hours before losing the trail in tall grasses. Even though we never spotted him, I was so engrossed in finding the tracks that the hours seemed like minutes.
I wondered if the reason the bush was so quiet all morning was because of the oppressive heat. It was blisteringly hot. I wasn’t yet used to the African midday sun—a sun that felt like it would burn a hole through my hat and stop my heart. It was hard to breathe. I lagged behind until I was the last in line. I could barely keep up, and I was nearing heat exhaustion. So much so, that after the lodge manager, Christina, delivered lunch, I reluctantly returned to camp with her to escape the heat. I learned later that things got a little wild after I had left.
Towards the end of the day, just when Scott and the others were close enough to camp that they could almost taste the cold beer, they came across a breeding herd of elephants. Breeding herds can be cranky because they consist of moms, aunts, and babies and everyone knows that the most dangerous animal in nature is a mama bear (or elephant) protecting her young. And these mamas were no exception. Several charged. Escape was made down a steep ravine and up the other side.
By the time the elephants had chased the group a sufficient distance away, everyone was out of breath. Inhaling deeply proved unpleasant though, because a few feet away lay a half-eaten carcass of an enormous kudu antelope. Brett, rifle still at the ready, stood over the carcass. Then, in a split second, he arched his back and aimed the rifle into the tree directly above the kudu’s mangled remains.
Scott related the story to me when they got back. “By the look on Brett’s face, he expected to see a leopard sprawled out on a limb above us ready to protect his kill. Then, just as we all began to relax, a spotted hyena trotted by not fifteen feet away. Tris, you would have loved it.”
I’d missed all the action. But I wasn’t as upset as I thought I would be. There’s an old saying: you don’t have to run fast—you just have to run faster than the slowest person. I am usually always the slowest person, especially in the heat. Then I move like a sloth.
Temperatures the following afternoon were much more bearable. Again, we were tracking on foot, mostly birds and small animals, when suddenly, we saw two female lions resting in tall grass. Rather, they saw us. If they hadn’t stood up, we probably never would have seen them. They were a fair distance away.
Their reaction was immediate and aggressive. All at once they issued booming growls and snarled. They charged rapidly, with eyes locked on our limbs. Both Brett and his back-up cocked their rifles and began shouting at the lions. The lions came to an abrupt stop. “Retreat now,” said Brett, and we commenced an agonizingly unhurried pace backwards, single file, towards the vehicle, watching the lions while they watched us. With each step, I expected a paw to trip me up. The urge to run was almost irresistible, but I knew better and fortunately, so did everyone else. On the first day of class, we learned the bush adage: whatever you do, don’t run. Everyone knows that cats like to chase moving targets, so we all walked backwards, with intention, away from these big cats.
I felt my heart pounding and my blood whooshing in my ears. I couldn’t seem to catch my breath. The adrenaline that coursed through my bloodstream made me weirdly weightless and tingly at the same time. I remembered what we had learned about piloerection because it was happening to my body. Piloerection is what happens when the hair on the back of your neck stands up on end. It’s a fight or flight reaction. When animals initiate piloerection, they appear bigger and more threatening. I hoped I looked as big as the Hulk.
When we were within twenty paces of the vehicle, we turned and made a beeline for the safety of the open-topped, open-sided Land Cruiser. That was when it felt most like a nightmare, the kind where you desperately want to run, but your feet won’t move fast enough to escape the dragon.
Brett was puzzled by the lion’s aggressive response because we were so far away from them when they charged. He decided that we should continue to observe the lions, but from the safety of the vehicle. For whatever reason, lions don’t perceive humans in a vehicle as a threat, even in an open-topped, open-sided game vehicle like the one we were in.
We discovered the reason for the angry charge when we drove into a grassy clearing surrounded by dense brush. Lying in the grass, were three panting females and two massive male lions, one with a mane so long and tangled it had dreadlocks. One female looked pregnant, and at least one other was in heat. The two male lions keenly vied for her attention.
No wonder the lions were angry. On foot, we had walked into their bedroom and spoiled the mood. Because we were in the vehicle now, the lions paid little or no attention to us, so we saw some unforgettable mating behavior firsthand, including a violent tussle between the two males.
Not every day was so exciting. We studied, walked, and tracked animals in temperatures that ranged from hot and dry, to frigid and wet. There were many days that were picture perfect—glorious bird-chirping mornings and afternoons so still it made me wonder where all the animals had gone. Each day, we learned something new. Scott and I hadn’t exercised our brains that much since college. All throughout, Ndoto sat parked near the classroom on a patch of earth overlooking Amakhala Game Reserve. Some days, she seemed to beckon impatiently, “Come on. What are we waiting for?” Sometimes I was the one who was impatient. Twice, I climbed up on her roof with two books: The Behavior Guide to Mammals and The Lonely Planet Guide to Africa, and dreamt about the months ahead. There wasn’t much time for dreaming though, what with classes and studying and walking. Though Ndoto and I were sometimes itchy to get on the road, I didn’t regret the days spent on the course, especially the day I learned where Norman slept.
THE PLACE WHERE NORMAN SLEPT
During an earlier training walk on Amakhala, we had come upon the remains of a decaying elephant lying on a gently sloped hillside. We could smell the scene long before we saw it. Sun bleached bones picked clean by hyenas and vultures were strewn widely around the area. The putrefied hide of the elephant lay folded over on itself like a discarded area rug. The place felt creepy. We turned to our mentor, Schalk, and asked how the elephant had died.
“This was a problem elephant,” he said. “He was unpredictable. He aggressively approached vehicles, pestered other elephants, and disrupted tranquility amongst the herd. The other elephants were always nervous whenever he was around. One day, another elephant, Norman, decided to take care of this elephant, once and for all. Norman was the biggest elephant there. He was the one who asserted discipline over the herd and doled out punishment when he and his eight tons deemed it necessary. That’s what happened to this elephant. He was killed by Norman,” Schalk said turning a bone over with his boot. “The battle between the two elephants went on for several hours. The shrieking of the herd as they watched the carnage could be heard a kilometer away.”
I looked around at the entire scene again and imagined the horror of it all. My initial reaction was that I wanted to stay as far away as possible from an animal as violent as Norman. Though Schalk always referred to him as “a wonderful old elephant,” each time I encountered Norman, I felt on edge.
Then came the day of our final assessment. Three of us were being evaluated: Scott, me, and a young Brit named Lewis. We each picked which animal we wanted to track and be tested on. When it was Scott’s turn he said, “I want to track Norman.” I was surprised and a little annoyed. Being around Norman still made me nervous. Eight tons was a lot of angry elephant. I gave Scott a seriously? look and fell in behind Lewis as we began tracking Norman.
But it wasn’t long before I was completely engrossed in looking for signs of Norman. Tracking animals became the most compelling aspect of my time in the bush. I didn’t necessarily ever need to lay eyes on the animal. It was enough to figure out, from their spoor, what they did that day. It was like reading the diary of a wild thing.
We had tracked Norman’s spoor for over an hour on foot and by vehicle, before his footprints disappeared in an area of tall grass and bushes. Peering into a wall of bushy shrubs, Schalk asked us to return to the vehicle, saying “I want to go a little further on my own.”
Shortly after, we heard a strange sound coming from the bushes. Then suddenly Schalk appeared, walking briskly toward us with an enormous smile on his face. We quickly opened the doors of the vehicle and were half in, half out when Schalk said, “It’s Norman.” Schalk leaned on the door and looked back to the bushes. “He’s sleeping. He was so still I thought, oh no, here’s another dead elephant. But then he snored.”
“That was the sound we heard,” I said in a giddy whisper.
Schalk started the vehicle and moved it behind a large clump of bushes near Norman’s bedroom. Then, we waited for Norman to wake up.
I stared into the thicket through binoculars. Each time Norman exhaled, the leaves on the bush next to him fluttered. We crept closer until we could hear him farting and snoring. We quietly made lunch. We made coffee. Finally, after an hour had passed, we heard branches snapping. Norman was waking up. He exited his den stiffly and blinked in the bright sun.
Using bushes and trees as cover, we walked parallel to Norman as he slowly made his way to a waterhole, about an eighth of a kilometer away. After a long drowsy drink, he retraced his steps. He paused briefly at the place where he had napped, before finally disappearing over a small hill and out of view.
“That was incredible,” I said quietly. “Can we go see Norman’s bedroom?” I asked as we neared the thicket. What I saw there completely changed my opinion of Norman once and for all.
The place where Norman slept was under a ceiling of thin branches intertwined with wispy vines that bore petite blue flowers. A large patch of soft dry earth was Norman’s mattress, and in the center of it was a perfect impression of a sleeping elephant. Up near where his trunk had laid was a bone, the hipbone of another elephant.
“Oh my,” Schalk said quietly. “This must be one of Tom’s bones. Tom was an old elephant friend of Norman’s.”
On the way to his nap, Norman had visited Tom’s nearby gravesite and picked out a piece of his old friend to take with him as he napped. We stared at Norman’s outline and at Tom’s bone and thought about all we knew and what we couldn’t ever know about the complexity of elephant relationships.
A wonderful old elephant indeed.
***
We took and passed our exams. Scott and I both earned qualifications as South African Trail Guides. I felt equipped with enough bush knowledge to take on the rest of wild Africa.
“Well, we did it,” Scott said with a grin as we carried our books and bags out to Ndoto.
“I’m pretty proud of us,” I said smiling back at him. Before opening the passenger-side door, I gave a pat to Ndoto’s name plate. “Here we go, Girl.”
Not only had I learned a lot about African mammals, I learned a lot about myself as well. I felt capable about what to do (or not do) around wild animals because I could now read their signs. I knew more than ever that I was happiest, my most true self, when I was out in nature. Africa could provide that in spades.
HONEY BADGER VS. NDOTO
Our trail guide course completed and exams over, we drove northeast to Nelspruit, where my niece Teresa and my nephew Brian had arranged to meet us in a few days. I was more than a little excited to have family time together, even if it was for only two weeks.
Before they arrived, we wanted to have Ndoto’s carburetor adjusted. Also, Ndoto still didn’t have a back seat, so we were trying to come up with a way we could carry the four of us safely and comfortably. Well, safely anyway.
We sourced a Land Rover mechanic whose shop was located up a steep dirt road outside of town. Ndoto had so little power, we barely made it up the hill. James Jackson, retired mechanic, Land Rover enthusiast, and tinkerer, raised Ndoto’s hood and prescribed a complete retrofit of the carburetor. That took five minutes. The next hour was a walk down Land Rover memory lane. I can’t recall how many Land Rovers James said he’d owned over his lifetime, but there were at least five in his yard, all in various states of disrepair. One Landy, stripped for parts, had a small tree growing up through the chassis.
James had adventures all over Africa in Land Rovers and had good stories to tell. His stories of Africa set our imagination and wanderlust in motion, so we listened with genuine interest. But we also had relatives arriving in three days, and talking wasn’t getting us a more powerful engine or adequate seating.
“James, when do you think you might be able to fix the carburetor? We have a lot of other things to get done on the car before our relatives arrive.” I paused and looked at the Land Rovers that lay scattered like fallen soldiers around his yard. “Also, do you happen to know where we might find a back seat?”
He led us into the garage where there was a pile of Land Rover guts in the corner.
“I don’t have a back seat, but you are welcome to this,” he said bending down and extracting a dusty four-foot long bench seat from the heap. It was one of those seats that usually sit sideways in the far back of Land Rovers. The metal was good, but the fabric had seen better days, probably in the 1960s. At a point in her life long ago, Ndoto had such seating behind the place where the back seat would have been. It wasn’t perfect, but we were running out of time. At least now we would have a place for Teresa and Brian to sit in the back.
“Aw, thanks, James. This will come in very handy,” I said, and we made an appointment to bring the car back the next day for the carburetor repair. Taking the seat with us, we stopped at a hardware store and bought a few pieces of plywood. Scott borrowed a saw and a drill from our guesthouse hosts and worked late into the night. First, he built a wooden backstop, three feet behind the front seat, which he attached to the interior frame of the Landy. He then secured the bench seat we had acquired from James to the plywood backstop, and Lord love a duck, we had a back seat. More of a perch really, but it would do for the time being.
Excited to see family after months apart, we drove to Utopia in Africa, a stately guesthouse in the hills above Nelspruit to meet Teresa and Brian. World travelers both, Teresa had flown to South Africa from Singapore, where she had been working for Yahoo!, and Brian came from Yemen where he worked for a non-governmental organization.
From the foyer I could see them sitting outside by the pool reading and sunning. I wanted to run into their arms, but I didn’t go out immediately. Seeing them brought back a flood of memories. I was only ten years old when Teresa was born, and Brian came along two years later, so we practically grew up together. When Teresa was first learning to talk, one of her first words became her nickname for me. At first it came out “We-o.” As her pronunciation improved, We-o became Will. That’s when I learned that she had named me after the barking dog who lived next door to my sister and her husband. They’ve always called me Will, or Aunt Will. Watching my niece and nephew through the window enjoying their first sundowners (sunset cocktail) on African soil made me smile.
It had long been my wish to share “our Africa” with the people I love most, and it was important for me that someone in the family would understand what all the fuss was about. I couldn’t wait to see the look on Brian and Teresa’s faces when they saw their first lion or leopard in the wild. I was so optimistic about our chances of sighting the Big Five with them, that I’d bought decals of a lion, a leopard, an elephant, a rhino, and a buffalo (plus one of a honey badger, because I found their never-say-die attitudes so compelling) from a small shop near the post office in Nelspruit. I planned to commemorate seeing each sighting by sticking a decal of that animal to the bumper.
Even after a late night of catching up on news from home, we were anxious to get on the road. Early the next morning, we tucked Teresa and Brian into Ndoto’s backseat and headed to the Moholoholo Animal Rehabilitation Center, where we met the honey badger known as Stoffel. Stoffel was famous on the Internet for the innovative ways he devised to escape his enclosure. I’d seen videos on YouTube of him making ladders out of rakes, so I was curious to see if he would try a breakout that day. The four of us watched Stoffel for twenty minutes, but he must have been having an off day because he mostly slept. Just as we were leaving Moholoholo, we received a heartbreaking email from the Knysna Elephant Park that Fiela, the baby elephant who had pooed on my lap and sucked Scott’s thumb, had suddenly become ill and had died. I thought of her caregivers and how helpless they must have felt and how devastated they must be over the loss.
After checking in to a guesthouse nearby, we grilled some steaks and opened a bottle of Fat Bastard.
“To Fiela,” Scott said, raising his glass in a toast to a sweet little elephant, while I told Teresa and Brian about our experience with her. I think they were surprised at my tears. But they had yet to lay eyes on an elephant.
After dinner, we sat around the fire discussing how and where we would spend the next two weeks.
“I would really like to see some animals,” Teresa said. “And maybe go on some walks, if possible.”
Brian was more Gumby. “Whatever you guys have planned for us is fine by me,” he said stoking the logs in the firepit. “Seeing some birds would be great though. I’m just happy to be here.”
Fortunately, South Africa offered plenty of wildlife viewing opportunities, so we felt providing them with some sightings would be pretty easy. If I had to pick one country where my family could reliably see the Big Five it would be South Africa, particularly the Greater Kruger area.
“Scott, we should take them to Africa on Foot,” I said, referring to the camp where we did some of our field guide training.
“That’s a great idea. This time though, instead of sleeping on the floor of the open-sided two-story viewing platform, let’s stay in the chalets like real guests,” Scott said giving me a wink.
Because my niece Teresa and I are both crossword puzzle addicts (we’d even attended the American Crossword Tournament in Connecticut and shook hands with Will Shortz), she brought with her several back issues of the New York Times Sunday Crossword. After checking in at Africa on Foot the following afternoon, we quickly changed into swimsuits and headed to the pool to conquer a puzzle or two before our evening game drive.
Teresa, whose passion is gardening, clicked her pen shut and set her gaze on the landscape. “The climate reminds me so much of California that I think I’m there,” she said, “then I notice a tree, a bush, or a flower I’ve never seen before, and I know I’m in Africa.”
“I was just thinking the same thing,” Brian said. “The trees here are amazing. Will, what’s that one over there? The one that looks like it’s standing on its head,” he asked pointing to a massive tree in the distance.
“That’s a baobab. Their limbs look like roots shooting into the sky, don’t they? Elephants love the fruit they produce. During droughts, they dig their tusks into the fibrous trunks for moisture. Folklore has it that baobabs were vain trees that bragged so often about their majestic appearance, God turned them upside down to teach them some humility.” It made me smile that Brian and Teresa’s first observations of Africa was the flora. It was what I had noticed on my first visit too, before the animals or the people.
As comfortable as we were in our chalet that night, Scott and I didn’t get much sleep. We were kept awake by what is known as the nighttime bush chorus; the rhythmic tone of the scops owl, interspersed with the trumpeting of elephants, the whooping of hyenas, or the high-pitched yip-bark of a side-striped jackal. We didn’t mind. The sounds of the bush at night are one of the reasons we come to Africa.
It wasn’t until 4:30 a.m. that everything finally became still and peaceful. Lions were settling down to feed on a kill, bush babies were done crying, and the elephants had gone quiet. Just as I was about to close my eyes and drop off to sleep, I heard snuffling at our door. A minute later, I heard someone or something trying to break into Ndoto.
I sat up and gave Scott a nudge. “Babe, I think a hyena is chewing on Ndoto.”
“Huh? What time is it? Go back to sleep,” he said grumpily.
Then, after what sounded like a can opener prying open the roof of our vehicle, Scott flung back the duvet and mosquito net, grabbed a head torch, and raced outside.
“You bastard.” He whisper-shouted it because other guests were still sleeping. I went to the door and opened it a crack. I saw a bow-legged rodent wearing what looked like a cheap white toupee on his back. He was intently studying Scott, who wore nothing but a head torch. The expression on the honey badger was undeniably bemused, as if he was thinking, Do you really think it wise to stand there in your birthday suit?
When attacking, honey badgers often go for the groin.
“Yikes,” Scott said. Protecting vital areas, he retreated to the chalet to pull on shorts and shoes. By the time he had returned to the scene of the crime, the honey badger was already in the process of mounting Ndoto in a way that would do the most damage.
Instead of climbing onto the bumper then the hood, he stood at the driver-side door, stretched his front legs up over his head, and scraped and clawed his way up the fender to the bonnet, like a maniac doing a chin up. Suddenly I was back in the fourth grade. Sister Mary St. Bernard (known affectionately as Sister Bow-Wow) was using her fingernails on the chalkboard with teeth-clenching, drive-you-mad effect, to get the class to pipe down.
“You rat bastard,” Scott said with quiet fury. The honey badger, not bothered by Scott in the least, looked as if he was thinking of ways to do even more harm to Ndoto. Scott returned to the chalet for the camera, in order to photograph the damage. But honey badgers are not only ferocious, they are quick. By the time Scott had arrived back outside, the honey badger was almost done prying the entire driver’s side window frame away from Ndoto with as much effort as if he was opening a manila folder. Faster than Scott could curse again, the honey badger was inside the vehicle, frantically and furiously (obviously words created when man first encountered a honey badger) sniffing, scratching, and pawing all over the seats and along the upholstered doors like a cyclonic Tasmanian Devil. He took time to paw through our library and fling books about. Then, he climbed out the now broken window frame and onto the hood. He calmly looked into Ndoto through the front windscreen, then at Scott, then back to the broken window as if he were contemplating a quick dash back to the library. All the while Scott continued to wave his arms and whisper-curse. Finally, the honey badger hopped down and trotted away, happy to return another day. The good news was that while the honey badger was running amok inside Ndoto, he somehow managed to fix the switch on our heater fan.
After that encounter, the car smelled funky. Scott used duct tape to secure the window and stuck the honey badger decal that I had bought in Hoedspruit, not to the bumper, but to the base of the broken window frame.
“I knew there was a reason I bought that in Hoedspruit,” I said while Scott muttered “Bastard,” and applied the decal with much more force than needed.
Africa on Foot had honey badger problems before that night. We heard stories of one badger that broke into the kitchen so many times they had to replace the wood door with a steel one. Another badger, or maybe the same culprit, broke into the office where it made short work of a case of chocolates. Then it ransacked the office and shat everywhere. Epic honey badger behavior. Honey badgers are renowned. A film crew with the BBC had been in camp the week prior trying to capture the marauding honey badgers on film.
We had a trail camera with us, providing a means of recording animal movements at night. Reviewing the footage of curious creatures that walked by or investigated our camp the night before, became part of our morning ritual. The evening following the attack on Ndoto, Scott secured our trail camera to the leg of a bar stool, which was toddler height, and managed to capture footage of a honey badger investigating the bar. Like us, he also seemed to favor gin.
We couldn’t have picked a better place to introduce Teresa and Brian to wild Africa. Every game drive from Africa on Foot was fruitful. Brian and Teresa got to see herds of elephants busy browsing, or drinking and playing at a waterhole, or flapping their ears gently in the breeze with relaxed, limp tails. They also saw juveniles or bulls whose tails went crooked when they were anxious. Tail position was one of the first things I had learned about elephants.
“If you ever came across a bull elephant with a crooked tail, it means they are anxious so it’s time to retreat,” I said to Teresa and Brian.
Recalling some of the things we had learned during our course at Ulovane, allowed us many teachable moments with “the kids” as we called them, and that was fun for me. Not lucky enough to have children of our own, it was always a special treat for me to spend time with the youngsters in the family. I wished their sister Briget, and also Clare, Colin, and Kevin (the children of my three brothers), could have been there with us too. It is such a privilege to get to be a good auntie.
Teresa and Brian couldn’t have known how lucky they were to see so much wildlife up close on their first trip to Sub Saharan Africa. During a night drive, a leopard came so close, Brian could have reached down and touched her. There was a pride of lions that padded through the brush just below where Teresa sat in the game viewer and another group of lionesses lying down at dawn after an unsuccessful hunt, which we surmised by their sunken bellies. They greeted one another by bumping heads or brushing against each other, just the way a domestic cat would, before flopping on their sides to sleep or groom.
Guides, Matt and Ryan, led us on foot during the day. We came across a small herd of elephants during one walk. They were slowly moving through, eating the leaves from mopane trees as they walked along, their direction of movement obliquely toward us. Matt had us all squat down, single file near a termite mound, so we could watch elephants just being elephants. The matriarch and aunties used their trunks to strip butterfly shaped leaves from the branches, stuffing them in their mouths before moving to another tree. The elephants didn’t eat all the leaves off one tree at a time. Instead, they selected a few branches and moved on to give the tree a chance to recover and provide more food later. Meanwhile, the juvenile elephants, who were easily distracted, had to be encouraged to keep up with the herd. The adult females would emit a deep rumble from their bellies, instructing the loiterers to step up their pace and draw near. The babies mostly stood under their mothers, trying to nurse or spinning their little trunks in circles. The elephants never knew we were there, which was the best part. I looked at Teresa and Brian and read the wonder on their faces. What a gift this was for Scott and me to get to enjoy this time with them.
Matt and Ryan were not only terrific guides, they were also wonderful hosts. When we set out for the last afternoon game drive of our stay at Africa on Foot, I mentioned to Matt that I missed eating in the boma, the rustic, small open-air enclosure with outdoor fireplace, where we had taken meals as students and not “real guests.”
“It was so much cozier than in the lodge dining room,” I said. “I loved eating there.”
“I’ll be right back,” he said leaping out of the vehicle and running into the lodge. He came back wearing a smile on his face.
When we got back from the game drive at dusk, Matt escorted us directly to the boma. A crackling fire in the outdoor fireplace illuminated a candle-lit table set for six.
“Aw, Matt. Way to spoil us, man.”
We could have stayed at Africa on Foot longer, but we wanted Teresa and Brian to experience the famed Kruger National Park. We said our farewells the next morning and piled in Ndoto.
During three all-day game drives through the park, we saw almost as many animals as anyone would hope to see in a month. Impalas leapt through tall grasses and zebras and giraffes halted in the middle of the road to stare at us. Lions, leopards, hippos and raptors were there too. Brian took special interest in the birds and the baobab trees. Teresa favored the impalas and the elephants with calm tails.
The new “back seat” was so uncomfortable that we started sitting three across the front, with one of us perched in the back. Teresa was usually in the middle front seat, where her view was obscured by our “air conditioner,” a small 12-volt house fan attached to the dash. She never complained. It made me happy that my niece and nephew had such a remarkable wildlife experience on their first trip to South Africa. But wild Africa rarely disappoints.
On the day we left Kruger Park, we were just minutes from the exit when I noticed something ahead in the road.
“Look at that warthog. What’s it doing standing in the middle of the tar road? That’s weird. It’s staring at us and not moving,” I said.
Normally, warthogs shoot their tails straight into the air and take off running when they see a vehicle or a person. This little warthog let us drive right up to where it was standing. But it wasn’t a warthog. It was a newborn baby rhino, peering at us with innocence and curiosity.
“Oh no,” I said, thinking it was on its own because its mother had been poached.
Scott stopped the car. We wondered whom we should call to report a poaching and orphaned baby rhino. Suddenly, the tiny rhino seemed to realize we weren’t an animal and trotted into the bush. Scott drove slowly forward while we peered into the thick brush. A few moments later, we spied the mother eating grass, about forty feet away from her baby.
“These Rhinos don’t stand a chance against poachers,” I said sadly.
A few days later, we drove Teresa and Brian to the Eastgate Airport and said our goodbyes.
“People encounters matter too,” I said blubbering.
We watched the plane take off, then drove to the small town of Hoedspruit. Scott wanted to take an hour-long microlight airplane flight before we carried on to Botswana.
It’s funny how an hour in the air can lead to a whole new passion.
A SOLO, SOLO
The hour he spent in the air flying over Hoedspruit reminded Scott how much he loved flying.
When he climbed out of the plane, he was beaming. “Tris,” he said, “I know you are anxious to get to wilder Africa with Ndoto, but I’d really like us to stay here for a while, so I can take lessons. This is an opportunity for me, once and for all, to get a pilot’s license. I think it would take about a month.”
Because life is short, and because we do our best to support each other’s passions, and because the rest of Africa would still be there in a month, I said, “Sure, Babe, we can stay.”
“That’s great Tris, because my first lesson is tomorrow morning.”
The next morning, at Madham’s Café near the airfield, I was waiting for Scott to finish his first flying lesson, when a man approached me.
“Hi, I’m Donovan,” he said with a friendly smile. “I saw you and your Landy coming into town this morning. She’s a beauty. ‘One life, live it, right’?”
“Yep, that’s the Land Rover motto. We love it. The vehicle and the motto.”
“What year is it?” he asked.
“She’s a 1973 Series III.”
“Wow. Forty years old. A real classic. Are you traveling all over Africa?’
“Yes. Well, up to South Sudan and back. That’s the plan. But at the moment, we’re looking for a place to stay here in Hoedspruit for a month or so, while my husband takes flying lessons.”
“Well, I have a small cottage on my property. It’s a bit out of town, but you are welcome to stay there.”
“Wow. That is so kind of you to offer. I was hoping for a place in town, though,” I said.
“Shame. Here’s my card in case you can’t find a place. Safe travels,” he said.
The hospitality of South Africans is beyond measure. They are even hospitable to total strangers.
I put Donovan’s card in my wallet, paid for my coffee, and stopped in to a realty office across from Madhams.
“Good morning. Say, do you manage rentals by chance?” I asked the woman sitting at a desk. “My husband and I are looking for somewhere to stay in town for about a month.”
“Shame, we don’t have anything at the moment.” She paused, then added, “But I know of a woman, Lisl, who is looking to rent a room in her home in Raptors View Wildlife Estates. She works across the way at Madham’s Cafe.”
One reason I love small towns, is that everyone knows each other.
I went back to the cafe and asked for Lisl, who came bounding out of the kitchen. She wore her hair in a ponytail and was fit and trim. She spoke with directness and a smile, and she seemed bright and no-nonsense. My kind of woman. She was also very busy. Everyone in Hoedspruit seemed to have two or three occupations. Lisl had four, at the time I had met her. She taught Pilates, Tai Chi, and Zumba. She was the “Goodness Guru” at Madham’s Café. She was also a writer. Before all that, she was the first female helicopter pilot instructor in the South African Air Force. Above all, Lisl was addicted to the Tour de France.
“The Tour is going on now,” Lisl said. “If you do move in, don’t even think about turning the channel,” she said. “Also, it’s important to me that there is only healthy food in my house.”
Her last stipulation meant we would need to hide our Doritos.
It was arranged that Scott and I would meet Lisl at her home an hour later.
I picked Scott up at the airfield and drove through the gates of Raptor’s, a private reserve with “soft game,” meaning that there were animals like aardvarks, antelopes, warthogs, and giraffes roaming around freely but none of the Big Five. Well, except for a leopard or two people kept talking about. On the drive in, two giraffes crossed the road in front of us, making me love it immediately. Lisl’s spare en suite bedroom, with French doors leading to a deck that overlooked Africa all the way to the Drakensberg Mountains clinched the deal.
With accommodation secured, Scott made a plan with pilot and instructor, Bruce McDonald, for flying lessons. Scott needed a minimum of twenty-five hours of flying instruction. Then he had to complete a few solo flights and pass some written tests before his “ye-eees!” moment. If successful, he would be a licensed microlight pilot in South Africa.
What we hadn’t known then, was that Bruce was not only one of the best instructors around, he was also a pilot contracted to fly anti-poaching patrols over Greater Kruger. From his bird’s-eye view, he assisted rangers on the ground to catch the criminals who killed elephants for their ivory and rhinos for their horn. Poaching was rampant, so Bruce was in the air almost every day to protect these magnificent creatures. Teaching Scott to fly would have to be squeezed in around Bruce’s anti-poaching responsibilities.
Flying wasn’t new to Scott. He first flew a plane solo in California when he was only sixteen years old. It wasn’t exactly intentional. Scott was a bright kid who had earned a scholarship for ground school from the Civil Air Patrol after achieving the highest score on the Cadet exam. He’d aced ground school and went on to begin flight instruction at a nearby airport. Then one day, the person in charge of assigning students to planes must have been momentarily distracted because he handed Scott a set of keys and told him, “Take her up.” So, he did. Scott did one circuit over the airfield and landed the plane safely, but not without a lot of shouting and frantic arm waving by the key master, who had realized his mistake immediately after takeoff. Those were different times. No one got in trouble. But Scott didn’t fly much after that. At twenty-four, he again took lessons without completing all the hours needed for a license. Years later, we both took and passed ground school, but Scott didn’t complete the flying hours necessary for a license then either. Flying was expensive. We were building a business at the time and payroll took precedence over passion, so Scott set his dreams of being a pilot aside once again.
I too had wanted to learn to fly. My childhood home was located near an airport. When I earned my first driver’s license at sixteen, I used to park my parent’s car near the runway and watch the planes take off. I’d wonder to which exotic destination the passengers were headed because, to me, any destination you had to take a plane to had to be exotic. In my late twenties, after completing ground school and one hour in the cockpit, I still wanted to travel to exotic places, but I knew that piloting a plane in the busy San Francisco Bay Area skies was not for me.
“I think I’ll learn to fly somewhere where there is less air traffic and radio chatter, like Africa maybe,” I said, handing the keys to my instructor.
All these years later, I was tempted to sign up with Bruce in Hoedspruit too, but he was far too busy to take on two new students at once, and Scott was the one most enthralled with flying anyway.
Luckily for me, if I couldn’t be in the bush, the little town of Hoedspruit was probably the one place in South Africa I could be content to spend a month or more. Hoedspruit is small, but it boasts seven good restaurants, three grocery stores, a golf course, a community of diverse and interesting people, access to many private game reserves, and an international airport just thirty minutes away. The town is surrounded by wildlife estates and is only a few hours by road from world famous Kruger Park and the borders of Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Botswana, and Mozambique. As a bonus, it had a day spa.
Living with Lisl was easy. She was a seriously fit and healthy eating machine, but she was also fun, interesting, and drank wine and gin, so we got along great. Best of all, she picked an incredible spot to live. When Scott cycled to the hanger on the bicycle Bruce had lent him, he often passed a giraffe, warthog, or jackal on the way. A huge male Nyala antelope trimmed the bushes just outside our bedroom window several days a week. We felt fortunate to have a chance to live at such a place.
A week after we moved into Lisl’s home, a young woman named Peach moved into the upstairs bedroom. We hit it off immediately and encouraged one another to eat healthier, like Lisl, at the same time discussing where we would stash our emergency salty, crunchy, fat-filled food. It wasn’t that Lisl’s culinary creations weren’t delicious. She was a wonderful chef. We just weren’t used to eating lean, healthy, fiber-filled food all the time.
One night, Lisl invited Peach, Scott, and me to join her for a quiche dinner. Knowing she probably wouldn’t put a pound of bacon in her quiche the way we would, Scott asked, “What do you use instead of bacon?”
“Brussel sprouts,” she said with a lift in her voice.
Scott made a yucky face until my poke in his side told him she wasn’t kidding.
In her Brussel sprouts, leek, and spinach quiche, Lisl blended together puréed white beans and eggs, instead milk and flour.
Scott, a committed meat and potatoes and pizza guy, was still not convinced. “So, you’re the one who buys Brussel sprouts,” he said. “I see them in the shops sometimes and always wonder who buys them.” The look Lisl threw Scott, I thought for a second she was contemplating canceling the lease. Later, while we were washing dishes, Scott admitted that Brussel Sprout Quiche, at least the way Lisl made it, was scrumptious.
When Scott wasn’t flying, we practiced our tracking skills together on the bush trails within the more than six-hundred-acre estate. We almost always ran into a species or two, like a giraffe or a zebra.
We also met interesting people. Renowned birders and guides, Derek and Sarah Solomon, gave generously of their time tutoring us in the art of recording wildlife sounds. James Steyn helped us log more wildlife encounters, leading us on a walk on a reserve he ran in the nearby Klaserie Reserve. Lisl invited me into her circles; a writing group and a movie night group, where I met talented, intelligent, thoughtful people like journalists Dianne Tipping-Woods and Joel Roerig. Even more than the Day Spa, it was the people of Hoedspruit that made me want to linger.
Scott mostly had his head in the clouds. He completely and utterly fell in love with everything aeronautic. When he wasn’t flying, he was thinking about flying. I had never seen him so focused.
“I don’t want to miss your first solo takeoff and landing,” I said to Scott as he left to fly one morning. “Let me know which day you will solo, so I can go with you to the airfield.”
We had discussed his impending solo flight a few times. Scott always said it was no big deal, but for me it was important. I was excited for him and a little anxious too. Plus, because of strong winds and bad weather, Scott’s course was taking longer than we had thought. The sooner he soloed, the sooner we could leave South Africa and drive to Botswana and beyond. I wanted to be there for his solo, cheer him on, and celebrate his accomplishment when he landed. Things like this are a big deal. Plus, I knew that when I watched him take off, I would be picturing a sixteen-year-old version of Scott in the cockpit.
“Tris, it’s no big deal. Remember, I first soloed over thirty years ago.”
“But, not in Africa. This will be your first African solo. It’s different,” I said.
“Okay. I know you want to be there, so I will try to let you know before I solo. I’m sure it won’t be today though,” he said and off he went to fly his circuits as usual with Bruce. Three hours later, he was back. Just by the look on his face I could tell.
“You soloed, didn’t you?”
“Yes. Halfway through the lesson, Bruce turned to me and said, “You’re ready.” Scott had a pained look on his face. “I’m sorry you weren’t there. It was so unexpected. I flew one circuit and landed. I was in the air less than ten minutes. It wasn’t a big deal.”
I felt so many emotions all at once. I was so proud of him. But I was disappointed that I had missed an important event. Scott had started and stopped flying lessons since he was a teenager. Many of his friends were pilots. Some flew honorably for our country. “Important flying,” Scott called it. As far as he was concerned, this was just an opportunity to obtain a license once and for all. No big deal. But how often does one get to watch the most important person in their life fly a little plane for the first time alone over Africa? Only once.
I shook off my selfish disappointment and hugged and kissed him.
“Congratulations, Scott. I’m very proud of you.…I so wanted to be there.… Did they give you champagne?” I asked, trying not to be upset. “I can’t believe you went solo without me,” I said with an illogical finish.
Those who know us, understand we do practically everything together. When our friends heard we were planning to spend a year together in a Land Rover in Africa they weren’t surprised. It was something they could envision us doing. So, if there were any couple that would solo together, so to speak, it would be us. We rarely celebrate individual victories or accomplishments without the other present, champagne toast or not. Now, after thirty-five years, I felt we had suddenly become like so many other couples that “did their own thing.”
So, it seemed I should do something solo too. But it had to be something equally adventurous and risky. I decided to confront my biggest fear in the biggest way possible. I was going to kiss a hippo named Jessica.
I KISSED A HIPPO AND I LIKED IT
The heavily corrugated, intestine jostling gravel road to Jessica the world-famous hippo, made me regret the entire bag of Lays Potato Chips I ate on the way.
When I finally arrived at the farm where Jessica lived, a young man named Ryan was at the gate. No doubt he had heard Ndoto coming.
“Welcome,” he said taking a quick scan of the interior. “Did you come by yourself?”
“Yep. Today I’m flying solo. Though I’m sure my husband would love to be here.” I was trying not to blame Scott because I missed his solo, but I was still disappointed. I was also trying not to think about what would happen to all those potato chips if Jessica gave me a sudden fright. I asked, “What happens after I get up close and personal with Jessica? Do I get to celebrate with champagne?”
Ryan cocked his head. “Uh, Jessica drinks tea.”
“Oh. Okay, whatever. My husband will probably be sorry he missed this.”
Ryan led me down to a fence made of rough hewn logs and indicated that I should climb over. Only it was a little taller than crotch height, so my attempt at a slow-motion hurdle was not entirely successful. Walking like Tex Ritter, I followed Ryan to a wooden bench.
“Sorry about that,” he said pointing back toward the fence. “I don’t know why the owners won’t install a proper gate for guests.” He looked toward the parking area. “Would you mind waiting here alone for a few minutes? I think I hear another guest arriving.”
“Sure, not a problem.”
Soon, newlyweds from New York were seated next to me on the bench. They were rather short in stature. I wondered how they got over the fence. Their guide, with broad shoulders and a sturdy frame, stood a distance away enjoying a Coke. Maybe he lifted them over. We chatted about the animals they had seen so far on their trip and how long they were visiting South Africa.
“Is that your old Land Rover in the parking lot?” the husband asked.
“Yep,” I said.
“Did you drive here by yourself?” the wife asked. “Weren’t you scared? What if something happened to your car on the way?”
People often expressed surprise when they saw me out and about by myself, whether on foot or by Landy. One day while Scott was out flying, I decided to walk through the wildlife estate on the dirt road from Lisl’s house to the main gate, about three kilometers. Each time a vehicle came into view, the driver slowed down and asked if I wanted a lift. I spent more time turning down rides than walking. I began to worry that I would miss my appointment for a desperately needed full-body scrub (feet included, which was a good value for me) at the Hoedspruit Day Spa, so I ultimately accepted a ride from a swimming pool contractor.
“You are not afraid to walk alone?” he asked in his lilting Zimbabwe accent. “Don’t you know that there are reptiles and leopards?” He talked about the recent leopard sighting, all the way to the gate. There wasn’t enough time to discuss the snakes. Funny enough, I saw a snake while walking on the Aardvark Trail the next morning.
I turned to the couple from New York. “Sure, I drove here alone. My husband and I used to do everything together but these days, not so much.” I paused and watched as they swung their legs to and fro above the concrete floor in the covered patio like small children. “How did you get over the fence?” I asked.
Before they could answer, Ryan started a short video on a small TV about Jessica.
I learned that Jessica was only a few days old when she washed up on the bank of the Blyde River during a flood in 2000. Had retired game ranger, Tonie Joubert, not spotted Jessica trapped in debris along the shore, she would have died.
Jessica had spent the first five years living in and around Tonie and Shirley’s home, before being reintroduced to the river. Since then, the Jouberts had swam with her, cuddled her, gave her massages, and hand fed her sweet potatoes, corn, and warm rooibos tea from a bottle. At night, Jessica slept on the veranda outside their house. According to Ryan, she was never caged and was free to roam the river with other hippos anytime she desired. He added that Jessica sometimes joined a pod of hippos along the river for a day or two, but she always came back to the Joubert’s property.
Ryan led us down a ramp to a wobbly floating dock and handed us buckets filled with cut up sweet potatoes. “You can take turns feeding Jessica. Place a slice of potato in her mouth and when she stops chewing and closes her mouth, you can stroke her nose and face.”
The first thing I noticed about Jessica was that she was the size of a VW bus. Her long, razor sharp tusks made my potato chip laden tummy do somersaults. The inside of Jessica’s mouth was a healthy pink hue and muscular—six pack gums, so to speak. Also, she had bad breath.
I knelt and plopped a chunk of potato in her gaping maw. She chewed twice before opening her mouth again for more. Each time I fed her, I patted her wet nose. The skin around her nose was taut and thick, and, like many women her age, sprouted a few coarse hairs that pricked my hand when I patted her. I couldn’t believe I had touched a hippo. Ever since one chased our canoe on the Zambezi River in 2005, I had been terrified of hippos. I had no desire to get anywhere near them ever again. Jessica may have cured me.
After I fed her the potatoes, I sat on the dock and massaged her back with my bare feet. She was solid, not cuddly, and she had a few stiff hairs there too. But that felt good on my feet, so it was a win-win. She seemed to enjoy the rubbing, especially on her rump.
Ryan gave the couple a turn and then said, “Who would like to give Jessica a bottle of tea?”
“I would,” I said quickly.
Bottle in hand, Jessica waded over to where I was at the end of the ramp and put her feet and eight toes up onto the dock, which made that end of the dock dip precariously into the river. Fortunately, Jessica didn’t waste time when it came to tea and she finished the entire bottle before a count of ten. After the tea, I gave her a kiss on her nose.
When I returned home that afternoon, Scott, whose head seemed to be in the clouds, forgot to ask where I had been.
It didn’t matter. I’d kissed a hippo.
***
Scott completed his training and passed his tests. He was happy to have a South African pilot license, and I suddenly felt sexier being married to someone who could fly a plane. We drove to the dam on Raptor’s View at sunset and toasted his achievement on the hood of Ndoto, with champagne and strawberries.
Two days later, stocked up with the necessities of the road—motor oil, food, and gin—we rolled out of the familiarity of Hoedspruit and into the rest of Africa
I thought about all Hoedspruit had given us. I would miss our friends. I would probably miss the great food and restaurants too. But now I was more interested in feeding my dreams than my stomach.
THE ART OF SIMPLICITY—LIFE ABOARD NDOTO
With Hoedspruit finally in our rearview mirror, I was more excited than ever to overland Africa. But living in a forty-year-old vehicle was no walk in the park. It wasn’t long before I realized that, of the four pages of Land Rover jokes emailed to me by a Toyota Land Cruiser owner in Hoedspruit, most of them had more than a glimmer of truth.
Life aboard Ndoto was about as far away from the Hoedspruit Day Spa as one could get. I was in a constant state of dehydration because the passenger-side footwell was like Dante’s inferno. Rubber seals that once surrounded all the doors and windows were long gone. In their place were gaps as wide as my index finger. There was a silver dollar sized hole in the floorboard near the gearbox that spewed puffs of dust into the car every time we started her up. Particles of tawny colored grit covered the seats, the bookcase, the storage bins and every other surface inside of Ndoto, like a sprinkling of powdered sugar. I’ve already mentioned my air conditioner—a small dash-mounted house fan with dust colored blades that were once a vibrant blue. Sometimes, it spontaneously and unexpectedly came to life, usually the moment after I washed my face. The resulting plume of dust stuck to my face like static to a nylon slip.
Each time we did laundry, a significant amount of African topsoil was washed down the drain. We could have avoided most of the dust if we had stayed on tar roads, but we preferred the dirt or gravel tracks because we were sure they would take us to the more beautiful places. Flowers don’t grow on tar roads.
“How come I didn’t notice all this dust before?” I asked Scott while wiping a layer from the dash for the third time that day.
“Most of the roads around Hoedspruit were paved. And you didn’t notice the dust on the road to Angie’s G Spot because you were busy being nervous about the edge of the road and the fire.”
“Yeah, that’s true,” I said reaching into the dash for another wet wipe.
As if Marie Kondo had waved her magic wand over everything that sparked joy in Ndoto, there was a place for everything, and everything had its place. Next to the disposable wipes sat a roll of toilet paper for the nose and/or other. Anti-inflammatory tablets were kept in an old medicine bottle wrapped in an Obama Care bumper sticker, and sunscreen sat directly in front of me. The middle section of the dash held sunglass and eyeglass cases, head torches, pens and pencils, and a glue stick to paste drawings or pictures in my journal. A GPS and a small camera filled up the rest of the space. Peaceful Sleep insect repellent was always at the ready to keep the mosquitoes at bay. I told myself that snakes hated it too, so at night I gave a blast to the tires, the outside of the tent, and the various gaps in Ndoto before we retired.
Scott kept a wildlife sound recorder in his cup holder. Mine held a stainless-steel water bottle. We bought drinking water in stores or organized camps. And we carried extra water in two five-gallon containers.
In a slot inside my door, there was a poo shovel, a South Africa map, an Eastern and Southern Africa map, and a map of the entire continent of Africa, just in case we were motivated to head farther north than South Sudan. (I won’t lie. I also had a map of the world.)
The front bench seat was covered in gray pleather (plastic leather). At one time, it must have had padding, but now it was as flat as a pancake. We’d let each other know when it was time for a break when one of us exclaimed, “My ass is numb,” which was frequent. And that back seat; It was more a handy backstop that kept passengers from falling onto the four small bins that contained our clothing.
We’re big readers, so we also had a proper two-shelf library on board. It was filled with guidebooks, wildlife reference books, our field guide logbooks, and fiction and non-fiction. We had so many books on board that Ndoto always tilted to the right.
We had firewood and four jerry cans of petrol on the roof rack. Tools and spare parts lived in a large plastic bin under a raised floor in the place where feet would normally rest in the back seat area. One pot and one pan, plates, and dry goods, such as pasta and rice were stored in long shallow bins that slid in and out under the raised floor. These were accessible from the rear door. It wasn’t hard to keep food from spoiling because when we were in Nelspruit, we splurged on a refrigerator worth almost as much as the entire vehicle. It even had a freezer that held not one but two bottles of gin. And, unlike the 12-volt fridge that came with the vehicle, the new one didn’t unplug itself whenever we got a little too frisky upstairs.
The solar panels and table were stored on a shelf that was attached to the ceiling and ran half the length of the Landy. Scott built that, and it was genius. The panels stayed protected and miraculously free of dust. In the back, two chairs folded into tidy squares when they weren’t in use. Next to these, sat the propane tank that we used for cooking.
We quickly established a routine. When we arrived in camp, I got behind the wheel and parked Ndoto so that we could enjoy the sunrise from our bed inside the rooftop tent. I placed the table and chairs where they would be convenient to the back door (pantry), yet situated in an aesthetically pleasing way.
When Ndoto was exactly where I wanted her, Scott got behind the wheel and moved her to a spot that was level. He flipped open the tent, attached the ladder, reset the table and chairs wherever, and poured the gin and tonics, which were always appreciated after a day of rough, or hot, or frustrating driving in Africa. I wiped down the table that had acquired the obligatory layer of dust, moved the table and chairs again, and spread out our small tablecloth that was kept white by regular washing with the local diaper detergent. After all that, we watched the sunset while I cooked dinner over our single burner propane stove. This was a highly enjoyable time of day. We relaxed over sundowners. I loved cooking in the bush, and Scott seemed to enjoy watching me cook in the bush.
We talked about how we might get to Knysna for Karl and Mandy’s wedding, if we would climb Kilimanjaro, and when we might arrive in South Sudan, our northernmost goal of this trip. There was plenty of canned tuna, optimism, and curiosity on board, so we were content not knowing where we would be the next week or even the next day. We sat around a campfire, or, location permitting, we strolled to the camp bar for music or conversation with other overlanders. Showers usually happened sometime between arrival and bedtime.
We rose and fell with the sun, so bedtime came early. Almost every morning, Scott remarked happily with a stretch, “I never sleep so well as I do in Africa.”
JUST ONE MORE RUN—LOST IN LEVIES
Inching our way toward the Botswana border, we came to Mapungubwe. A thousand years ago, Mapungubwe was the site of a thriving kingdom and advanced culture. It was now a national park and world heritage site, made up of dramatic sandstone boulders and monoliths. More importantly, it borders the Limpopo River, the gateway to the rest of Africa—the real Africa. It was so close I could smell it.
“Let’s do one more game drive in South Africa before crossing the border,” Scott said.
I should have said no because it was the exact same way he’d said, “one last run” on a skiing holiday when, after crashing into a warming hut, he ended up with a torn rotator cuff and bruised ribs.
But I said, “Why not,” so we headed out on Mapungubwe’s river loop.
At times, we were in sand so deep Ndoto struggled to maintain forward motion. When we came across a herd of elephants tearing branches off trees, we switched off the engine to watch and to give Ndoto a rest. Ten minutes went by. Then, all the elephants, except one young male, moved off into the trees and disappeared. Not in any rush, we continued to watch the lone male pluck mopane leaves from the trees and tear the grass from the earth.
Then, without warning, and with a mopane branch still dangling from his lips, the elephant began a slow trot toward Ndoto. Scott quickly switched on the ignition and reversed until the elephant stopped and casually began browsing trees and bushes. He was partially blocking the road, so we watched and waited. A moment later, he turned and began trotting toward us again. This time, Scott reversed one hundred feet, until the elephant halted in the middle of the narrow road. Studying Ndoto, he flapped his ears rhythmically and wagged his tail. After several minutes, he took a step toward some bushes and began to eat or pretended to eat. And then he approached us again.
He repeated this behavior six times. We watched, he advanced, we reversed. Lather rinse repeat. It was almost as if he was playing a game with us. He never charged aggressively but rather loped toward Ndoto the way a happy old dog might. Still, wild animals are unpredictable, so we weren’t taking any chances. There are videos on YouTube showing complacent drivers behind the wheel of elephant-crushed cars. Even a half-crushed Ndoto would probably mean the end of our trip.
Finally, the elephant moved slightly off the road and into the brush, far enough that it was safe to pass. Incredibly, just as we were about to proceed, the elephant lifted a two-foot-long section of heavy pipe, part of an old irrigation system that he’d found in the bushes. He picked it up and held it in his trunk high above his head as if demonstrating, if I wanted to, I could smash your windscreen, but he seemed to say it with friendly eyes and a calm tail. After a minute, perhaps sensing the game was over, he let the pipe drop to the ground with a thud. He continued to watch us, barely flaring his ears as we drove slowly by. I was sure it was my imagination, but he seemed disappointed to see us leave. I wondered if he saw Ndoto as an old friend.
“At least now we know the reverse gear works,” Scott said with a grin.
The long loop drive and playing tag with an elephant, cost us valuable daylight hours. We would have to find a place to camp and try for the border in the morning. At the park exit, a ranger told us that while there wasn’t an established camp between the park and the Botswana border, he had heard of a man named Jorge who had a secure spot for overlanders to park overnight. He gave us detailed instructions.
“Don’t get lost,” he said twice.
The first part of his directions matched the landscape we were driving through, but when we began driving on top of levees (compacted mounds of earth that separated waterlogged fields from small hippo-populated ponds), I said, “This doesn’t seem right.”
“No, it doesn’t,” Scott said, agreeing.
But because we are ever-hopeful types, and because the landscape was interesting, we kept driving. When we drove through a large open gate, we didn’t notice the three padlocks that dangled from a latch. Finally, we came to a sign that read “Manager’s house.”
“Maybe that’s Jorge’s,” Scott said.
“But it doesn’t say Jorge’s. In fact, there hasn’t been a single sign that pointed to Jorge’s camp or to any camp.” I noticed two women standing along the road ahead. “Let’s ask those ladies if they know the way to Jorge’s.”
“Jorge’s?” I asked them, pointing down the narrow dirt track ahead, while lifting my hands in the form of a question. They looked confused and said nothing, so we drove on. The road soon became a footpath that disappeared into a river.
By the time we arrived back at the spot where we had met the two women, there were three more women with babies on their backs and toddlers at their feet. One of the women spoke English.
“Where are you going?” she asked.
“To Jorge’s Camp.”
“You mean Mazhou camp? But you will get lost.”
“We are already lost. But we are looking for a place called Jorge’s Camp, not Mazhou. Is Mazhou a place to camp overnight?”
“Ask at the compound,” she said and pointed north to another set of fields, separated by levees.
We drove on. The sun would be setting soon. We passed citrus groves and farm equipment and eventually arrived at a small compound, where men stood chatting and children played around their mother’s legs.
“Jorge’s Camp?” I asked.
The men gave us puzzled looks but eventually indicated we should keep going. We drove on until we came to a large farm shed, where a man was sweeping the earth.
“Jorge’s?” I asked again.
He pointed to a distant house, so we drove there.
“Jorge’s?” I asked a woman sitting on the porch.
She pointed next door. A young man followed us there, to an oasis that was completely out of place with its surroundings. There was a large stone house situated amid meticulously kept grounds. The lawns were manicured and arrays of flowers were in tidy bloom. There was plenty of room to camp, but there was no indication that it was anything but a private residence. We looked around for the man who had followed us there, but he was nowhere to be seen. We parked the Landy and called out. The place seemed deserted. We peeked in through the windows of the stone house to find it empty of all but cobwebs and dust. After a few minutes, an old man arrived.
“Jorge’s?” I asked.
“Yes.”
“May we camp here?’
“Yes.”
“Okay, that’s great. Where would we find the toilet and wash water please?” I asked.
“Yes.”
I was getting a bad feeling. I cocked my head and asked, “Ginger or Mary Ann?”
“Yes,” he said.
Not Mary Ann? Really? I thought.
We were torn. It was dark. At least a dozen folk knew we were dolts and that we were lost, which made us far too vulnerable.
“No wonder the ranger warned us about getting lost.” I said, thinking of options. I looked at Scott and by his posture (head down, fingers to his temple) could tell he was pondering with me. “This feels weird,” I said. “Let’s just drive to the Botswana border. We’ll be the first ones through in the morning.”
“Yeah, I can’t think of anything else to do either.” Scott thanked the man for his time and wished him luck.
“Yes,” he said, then picked up a garden hose to water a garden for no one.
We drove back the way we had come, though it was much more eerie driving on the levees in the pitch black because all we could see was what was in the narrow beam cast by our headlamps. We arrived back at the gate to find it locked up tight with all three padlocks.
“Oy gevalt,” I said using a phrase mom used when she was frustrated, and which described my current state of mind to a T. I’ve often wondered why mom used Yiddish slang when she was upset. She didn’t limit herself to Yiddish though. Sometimes, she spoke to her five kids in her first language, German, calling us kleine scheisse (little turds). Sometimes, she called us made up words like dobblefiseck, which she told us later meant something like “dumb bunny,” though the way she said it, it always sounded like a term of endearment. Yes, she was a hip, multilingual mom.
There was a small house next to the gate. Nearby, a pump labored noisily to bring water over earthen dykes and into the fields. Scott went to the door to ask if someone could open the gate for us, but the woman inside didn’t have a key and said that no one would come to open the gate until the next morning at 7:00 a.m.
We drove back the way we came, trying different levies, but all were dead ends. There was no way out, other than through that gate. We went back to the house by the gate and soon a man came out to tell us that the security guard for the property lived in a house a short distance back down the road. We were skeptical, but we drove away to try and find the guard anyway. No one was home in the dark house.
Scott was tired and exasperated. We couldn’t keep driving around looking for a way out because we were nearly out of petrol. We reported back to the man at the gate. “There was no one at the house. There were no women, no children, no chickens, no dogs,” said Scott. Then he put his arms half way up, like a weak surrender and pled, “Would it be alright with you if we spend the night here, in front of the gate, until someone comes to unlock it in the morning?”
The man said it would be okay, but that we should watch out for hippos.
“And snakes too I bet,” I said tiredly.
We flipped open the tent, set up the table and chairs in the road and had a simple dinner and a couple of glasses of wine. We agreed it had been an odd day and called it a night. Even over the noise of the pump, which never stopped, I heard the bellowing of hippos nearby. Scott slept the sleep of the unconcerned.
The next morning, while we were putting the tent away, a man arrived on a motorcycle. His name was Rouen, and it was his property we had squatted on. But he was the one who apologized, saying he was sorry that we were unable to leave the night before. He never heard of Jorge or Jorge’s Camp.
“We’re the ones who should apologize,” Scott said. “We were lost and short on fuel, so we were very relieved we were able to park overnight on your property. We’re just sorry we couldn’t get permission from you in advance.”
Rouen said that the reason he had to lock the gate every night was due to a spate of recent farm invasions. Some property seizures had escalated to murder. The details made me shudder. I knew about the government sanctioned land grabs in Zimbabwe (schemes to seize land from post-colonial white Africans to address racial imbalances of property ownership), but I was unaware that it had gone on in South Africa as well. The legislation was meant to amend colonial and apartheid era property laws, when Blacks were not permitted to own land. This might explain why the property we had almost camped at the night before was deserted but still had meticulously kept grounds. Sometimes, when a farm was seized, former employees continued doing what they had always done, without pay, while the infrastructure around them went derelict. Perhaps, the old man we met had been the groundskeeper once employed by the former owner.
When Rouen heard Scott was a pilot and that we were from America, he said, “I’m also a pilot. The best week of my life was when I attended the International Fly-In at Oshkosh, Wisconsin.”
“I sure hope you don’t tell your wife that,” I said.
Scott smiled at Rouen. “Of all the South African pilots I’ve met, the ones who haven’t been to Oshkosh say they want to go, and the ones who have been, say they want to go back. We hope to go someday too.”
When we bid one another good luck and happy flying, Rouen handed us a card.
“Next time you come through stay in my home, not around it, and go flying with me.”
That is the hospitality of South Africans.
GIVE ME YOUR BEEF
Eighty percent of Botswana is comprised of the Kalahari Desert. Despite looking like a place where little could survive, wildlife abounded.
We tested Ndoto’s low-low gear at the Pont Drift border post, one of the more exciting places to enter Botswana because it involves driving across the Limpopo River. Fortunately, it was the dry season. In the wet season, Ndoto would have drowned. She groaned, and shuddered, and stalled twice in the deep sand, but it was worth it because on the other side of the border was Botswana’s famous Tuli Block, a network of unfenced reserves made up of low, dry brush, deep sand roads, nyala berry trees, herds of elephants, and the vast emptiness of wild Africa.
One of Botswana’s main exports has long been beef. But in the 70s, there was a severe outbreak of hoof-and-mouth disease. Huge markets were lost, including Great Britain, which refused the beef until Botswana erected what’s called Veterinary fences to better control the cattle and the disease. It worked. But, as with many emergency measures, it resulted in unintended consequences. The fences affected the natural migration of non-farmed species. Antelope and other plain’s game were suddenly cut off from historic water sources and grazing areas. Ninety percent of wildebeest perished. Eventually, migratory species found new routes to food and water.
The fences continued to prevent outbreaks from spreading among the cattle and infecting the beef, which was a good thing. But when you are an overlander, the veterinary control stops could be a real pain. We not only had to drive Ndoto through a wide basin of disinfectant, which coated the tires in a solution that turned to white crust, we also had to dip every one of the shoes we had on board into the same pond of murky water that we had just rolled Ndoto’s tires through. After all of that, someone would come out of an Office of Agriculture (usually a roughly constructed, one-room building) and confiscate any meat we had on board. We had met some South African overlanders who took great pains to hide their meat before coming to a veterinary fence, but we usually planned our meat buying to avoid doing that. This time we hadn’t planned so well.
“So, do you have any beef?” A plump woman asked at our first veterinary stop in Botswana.
“We have a little minced beef. We were going to eat it tonight,” I said.
“Okay. But I must take it.”
“Um, what will you do with the meat?” I asked.
“I will eat it.”
I reached into the fridge behind me and turned over the evidence. She looked at the meager portion of beef in the Ziploc baggie and changed her mind. “You may keep your meat. Just don’t tell anyone you have it.”
Thanks to the woman at the veterinarian stop, we were able to have beef stroganoff that night. We didn’t tell a soul. The next night, we made vegetable Durban curry, and on the third night, we ate crushed red pepper and garlic with olive oil over pasta, which, in rotation, pretty much made up our on-the-road menu—mostly vegetarian, meat when we could get it fresh-ish.
Deeper into the Tuli Block, we came to Molema, advertised in our guide book as a rustic little camp with six spots along the Limpopo River.
“They call this rustic?” I said, amazed that each little campsite had running water, a flush toilet, and a hot shower. Water came directly from the Limpopo River. Since a camp attendant brought wood each day and lit a fire beneath a steel drum for our showers, he determined when we needed a bath, not me.
“More like glamping,” Scott said from the hammock he had strung between two trees.
Around sunset, a troop of banded mongoose busily snuffled and chirped their way through our campsite. Patient genets (adorable cat-like carnivores with spots and ringed tails), sat at the periphery of our fire pit waiting for us to go to bed, so they could scour our camp for tidbits. At night, the calls of hyena, lion, and leopard serenaded us to sleep. It felt like a respite, though we barely needed one yet.
“Let’s explore the dry riverbed,” Scott said in the morning after rusks (dry biscuits) and coffee. We found scads of bird and antelope spoor before spotting a few crocodiles a little too close for comfort. We backtracked to where Ndoto was parked and the illusion of security. There were no fences to keep animals from joining us any time they wanted. Every few minutes, one of us scanned the area for animals, which quickly became a habit.
“Situational awareness,” I said reminding Scott what we had learned on our course. “Know what’s around you and always have an escape route.” I looked up into the nyala berry tree that towered over Ndoto. “We could climb this tree if we needed to. Unless there’s snakes up there.”
Scott used the midday to get the solar panels up and running, so that we could charge batteries and keep what was in the fridge cool. I washed Ndoto and painted the railing on the roof rack.
As a kid, I hated painting. During my childhood, my parents bought and sold a few rental houses. To save money my brothers and I were called upon to help with the renovations, mostly painting. “Here, Tris, I have a special job just for you,” said my salesman-to-the-end dad as he pointed to some cumbersome window trim. When Dad retired, he took to combining all the paint from all the cans in our garage, then set about coating almost everything in sight with a custom color all his own, a cross between seafoam green and turquoise blue. He was colorblind. He painted the patio furniture and all the concrete in the backyard. Even the statue of Blessed Mother in the garden acquired a fresh layer of bright, blue paint. Dad’s method of painting came along with sound effects of a soft grunt, a strange uncontrollable habit that runs through the family. Scott shook his head as he watched me dabbing paint and grunting on the roof of Ndoto.
Sporting a freshly painted gray roof rack, we explored farther into the Tuli Block, to the Limpopo River Camp, a gem of a spot consisting of six campsites perched amongst more nyala berry trees on the banks of the Limpopo—a place where soft light and a hippo-dotted river screamed quintessential Africa. Just like at Molema, a man brought us firewood, swept the site, and fed wood under a geezer.
“I’m off for a shower,” I said to Scott who was lost in the latest Tony Park novel. I walked up a short slope to our private bathroom with toilet, sink, and polished concrete floor. The view I had from the open-air shower of Scott in the hammock that went with us on every trip, made me smile while I lathered up. I also gazed at Ndoto, her headlamps aimed at the slow-moving Limpopo River and the light of the approaching dusk playing on the red African soil.
“It’s so beautiful,” I said from the shower.
Scott set the book in his lap and watched me rinse my hair. “Looks pretty good up there too. I think I’ll join you,” he said rolling out of the hammock.
In the morning, we walked slowly around the sandy fire pit to identify the tracks of what came to investigate during the night. Hyena spoor was there and lizards had scurried through as well. Always, we found the tiny nickel-sized paw prints of friendly, shy genets.
Genets weren’t the only things friendly and shy at Limpopo River Camp. When we first arrived, the manager came out of the office to admire Ndoto and the lifestyle she provided us. He lent us a portable cooler box filled with ice and beer, and he wouldn’t let us pay for the six cold beers inside. When we returned the ice chest a few days later, he looked beyond us to the spot where Ndoto sat parked in the sand near the office entrance, and said wistfully, “It was nice meeting you. I usually don’t like meeting people because they come and then they go. But it was nice meeting you.”
I think it was Ndoto that he most liked meeting.
WE ARE HERE TO PROTECT YOU
We were low on gin and other necessities, so we drove in the direction of Selebi-Phikwe, a Botswana mining town big enough to support several grocery stores. On the way, we came to an out-in-the-boondocks police post near a sandy crossroads called Blain’s Drift. There was a stop sign outside a one-room police building, but there was no one in sight. After a brief pause, we proceeded. A half-kilometer later, we thought we might have driven the wrong way at the crossroads, so we turned back. After driving through the same stop sign again, Scott slowed to ask a man walking in the road for directions.
“Selebi-Phikwe?” Scott asked, adding excellent questioning gestures (perfected after years of playing charades with my family).
The man looked uneasy. Like he’d been caught doing something he shouldn’t. He shook his head quickly and gestured in the direction we had just come. By the time Scott turned the Landy around again, there was a Botswana police woman standing next to the stop sign with her hands on her hips and a tight expression.
“Good afternoon,” Scott said with a friendly, respectful smile. “Can you tell us if this is the way to Selebi-Phikwe?”
“Yes, this is the way. But I was just now coming to arrest you,” she said in a stern voice. “Oh yes, I saw you. You drove through here twice. And you did not stop in to say good morning. Also, I witnessed you talking to that prisoner.”
I wanted to tell her that I had never seen a free-range prisoner before but thought better of it because she was completely without a sense of humor.
“This is a serious matter,” she said. “We are here in the middle of the jungle for you. Elephants or giraffes could attack you. If you get robbed or lost, it is we who must come find you. We do all this for you, and you did not even stop to say good morning.”
We apologized for our misdemeanor, hoping she wouldn’t arrest us for lack of manners.
“We have only just arrived in Botswana, and we don’t yet know your customs,” Scott explained. “Also, we didn’t know that man was a prisoner.” Scott paused then asked, “Should we stop and say good morning at all the police posts in Botswana?”
“No. Just this one,” the woman said with a furrowed brow.
We repeated our apologies, and because short conversations are considered impolite in Africa, we talked of other things. In due course, she let us go with a hint of a smile and a definitive, “Proceed!”
NO PAMPERS NORTH OF THE LIMPOPO
When we traveled overland from Casablanca to Cape Town in 2005, on our Safari Jema, we crossed the continent mostly by public bus or bush taxi. Sometimes, we had to stand along the sides of dusty roads for hours on end, overheated yet hopeful, waiting for a lift. With our right arms extended at forty-five-degree angles, we waved our hands palm side down in the international “please stop” fashion at any passing mode of transport. Every private vehicle we encountered (granted, there weren’t many on our route) zoomed by with windows rolled up to keep the cool air inside and with nary a glance from the driver. In ten months of travel, only two people who weren’t commercial drivers ever stopped to give us a lift. In one case, the white Tanzanian man really had no choice. Scott was practically carrying me down the road in the town of Moshi. The lift was to the hospital, where I was to be admitted for malaria treatment. We never forgot how difficult it was to get from point A to point B on that journey, and we vowed that if we were ever lucky enough to own our own vehicle in Africa, we would offer free transport to those in need. Since crossing the Limpopo, we had many opportunities to do so.
Our first passenger in Botswana was a woman on her way to visit her sick brother in a hospital twenty kilometers away. After exchanging hellos and our names, she sat quietly next to me in the front seat, hands folded in her lap, staring at the road. After a time, she began to chuckle.
“Something is funny?” I asked from the middle seat, where I sat straddling the gear stick.
“You see,” she said, “it’s not common for a white person to pick a stranger up on the road. As a matter of fact, I have never seen it happen,” she said with a lift in her voice. “And now, it has happened to me.”
A week later, we offered a ride to a woman dressed in high heels, a straight skirt, and ivory blazer with matching hat, somewhat like Africa’s version of a Mary Kay saleswoman, eager to earn her first pink Cadillac. Joyce needed a ride to a town thirty-five kilometers away. She accepted the offer of a lift with a radiant smile. In perfect English, she greeted us with dressed-for-success enthusiasm. As she settled in, I asked about her family and if she worked outside of the home.
“Yes, I work. I am self-employed,” she said sitting up a little straighter. “In fact, I would like to invite you to join the company.” She told me that she sold vitamins, and that if I were to buy them from her and resell them, we would both make money. Amway style. “Please, join my company,” she said again.
“Unfortunately, we are heading to Zimbabwe after Botswana, so, logistically, I don’t think it would work. But thank you for the offer.”
She nodded and fell silent, staring at the road in front of us. After ten minutes she said, “You know, I think you will have many blessings.”
“You do? That’s great to hear. But why?”
“Because,” she said, “it is rare for a person like me to be sitting in the car of a person like you getting a lift. If my friends could see me, they would say Eish. What is that woman doing with those white people? So,” she said with a confident nod, “because you have stopped for me, I think you will have many blessings.”
When we reached her village, she climbed out of Ndoto and thanked us saying, “Sharp-sharp,” which was a Botswana expression meaning “very good” or “everything is okay.” Then, she crossed the road and joined a group of women waiting for lifts in the opposite direction. As we drove away, I looked back to see her smiling broadly, no doubt telling the story of how she got a lift from two white people in a sharp-sharp old Land Rover.
My blessings came all too soon. Twenty kilometers down the road, a group of two women, three children, and a man stood along the road waiting for a lift. There wasn’t a village in sight, and the area was populated with elephants and other wild animals. When the man saw that we were foreigners, his arm fell by his side.
“Do you think we have room for all of them?” Scott asked taking his foot off the gas pedal.
“We can make room,” I said, so he stopped and reversed.
It turned out that only one woman and her two children (ages one and three) needed a lift.
“Okay. Then we can all sit in front,” I said shifting over. While we still had the back-seat perch, endured so uncomplainingly by Brian and Teresa, it was covered in bins containing nature guidebooks and textbooks at that moment.
“I’ll hold the little girl on my lap,” I said while straddling the gear stick.
Next to me, the baby boy was soon sound asleep in his mother’s arms. A serene smile played on his lips and around his eyes while he slept.
What was he dreaming about? I thought. Elephants? Monkeys? Food?
As we drove, I tried to engage the little girl on my lap in conversation. Her mother told me that her name was Fuchsia. She smelled sweet like a flower, so that made sense.
“Aren’t you beautiful,” I said staring down at her little face.
Each time I spoke, she nodded exactly twice, always looking me directly in the eyes as though taking my strange words seriously. But she never made a sound. Aw, what an angel, I thought. After a while her eyelids grew heavy, and she stopped staring into my eyes and fell fast asleep. It felt nice to cradle a youngster in my arms. Scott looked at me and smiled, knowing that I was as happy as a clam.
Soon, Fuchsia, bundled up in too many clothes as African children often are, no matter how hot the day, was becoming warm in my arms. Too warm. She was in the deepest of sleeps. Why was it, I wondered, that a sleeping body seemed so much heavier than a wakeful one? She was as heavy as an eight-year-old, and my arm was going numb. I shifted position and let her head drop onto Scott’s arm, hoping she would wake up. No luck. It was as if she was in a coma. I was beginning to sweat. Then, without warning, my lap became superheated—and damp—then soaking wet. It was coming from Fuchsia or more precisely, Fuchsia’s bottom.
“Uh oh,” I said to Scott. “No Pampers north of the Limpopo.”
When we reached the tiny house where the woman lived with her husband and two children, I handed Fuchsia to her mother, indicating that Fuchsia had an accident by pointing to my sopping wet trousers. The mother chuckled, as embarrassed moms do when their babies peed on people who’d just given them a lift. She let me change into dry clothes in her home.
Their one-bedroom home was around two hundred square feet. A clean floral sheet separated a double bed and a small single bed from the rest of the house. That was where I changed. It was dim inside due to a lack of windows. Also, I wasn’t sure if there was any electricity ever, or if it came on for a few hours at night as was often the case in the area. In any event, while there were few belongings other than necessities, the space emitted the feeling of love and respect. The bed was made, clean pots and dishes were stacked neatly on a shelf, and the floor was swept.
I said goodbye to the children and gave their mom a hug. I was awarded an appreciative smile, as if to say, This mzungu (white foreigner) gets it. We are all in this together.
I felt strongly about giving rides, especially to women. Most women in Africa walk incredible distances carrying heavy loads of wood, water, and food, almost always with a baby on their backs. Our passengers rarely spoke English, and we could never keep up with the dozens of languages spoken, sometimes unique even from village to village, so we mostly used sign language to communicate. But it wasn’t hard to understand or to be understood. Everyone, the world over, understands the same basic needs: a helping hand, an act of kindness, empathy, compassion, and sometimes a lift.
We gave rides partly as a way of giving back to a place and people that had already inspired and enriched us, and partly because we’d never forgotten how hard it was for us to get transport through Africa in 2005. Plus, since we were all in this together, why not?
OLD SPICE, AND THE SPICE OF LIFE
Tracker withdrawals had set in. And we had them bad.
Identifying wild animals by their scent, footprint, midden, or even by the height of a highly polished area on a tree trunk (indicating a favored rubbing post), or any sign that said, I was here, can be addicting—at least it is for us. Instead of finding a twelve-step program (let’s face it, we would be right back at it at the first sign of bunched-together hyena toes), we found the Khama Sanctuary, a place for what I called spoor-seeking treasure hunts. And this wouldn’t be just any spoor. We would be hot on the heels of rhinos.
At check-in, we were told how many rhinos were on the reserve. I was surprised that the data was given out so freely. Numbers like that were usually kept secret, due to poaching concerns. But the fact that the place was called “Rhino Sanctuary” sort of gave them away. With the anticipation of one about to add tonic and a wedge of lime to a tall glass of gin, we booked a tracking safari for bright and early the next morning.
Ndoto had to be in low gear just to get to our campsite, three kilometers away. The road was so deeply grooved by the tires of the cars that had come before, Scott could take his hands completely off the steering wheel and still stay on course. We bounced and shimmied our way to camp within the gullies of sand as if we were on the Indiana Jones ride at Disneyland, although instead of it being a “fast-paced thrill,” it was a slow-paced slog. The destination was worth it. In the middle of our assigned campsite sat an enormous pod mahogany tree. It sported a massive crown that fanned out like an umbrella and a thick trunk with bulges at the base that was perfect for putting our feet up. I took it as a good omen that this mighty tree dominated our campsite. The root of the pod mahogany could be used to treat snakebites.
It wasn’t deliberate, but when we parked Ndoto and set out our table and chairs under the tree and stood back, the scene looked like the cover of one of those magazines that made you take out a pen and start a bucket list.
“Wow,” we said at the exact same moment.
“It’s hard to think about going on a game drive when it’s so perfectly beautiful right here, but don’t you think we should go out and try to find some rhinos?” Scott said.
We drove to a hide that overlooked a small waterhole. There was a lone rhino standing out in the open at the edge of the water, completely unaware that somewhere humans lusted after his horn and all the horns of all the rhinos that remained in the world. Poaching of these magnificent creatures is a sad and serious issue.
“Oh Scott, they’re truly sitting ducks,” I said hopelessly.
Botswana had a live-by-the-gun, die-by-the-gun, shoot-to-kill policy against poachers. The Khama Rhino Sanctuary exists to protect rhinos and to put a spotlight on another vanishing species. Because rhinos are facing extinction, they aren’t guaranteed a free and natural life in the wild. Incredible sums of money go toward protecting these magnificent beasts. Part of the problem is that rhino movement is rather predictable. They poo and mark their territories in pretty much the same spot every day, at places called middens. They have good hearing but bad eyesight, so when they are alarmed, they mostly stand still and rotate their large ears looking around ineffectively for the source of the sound.
“Sitting ducks,” I said again.
It was a quiet ride back to camp.
Deflated by the plight of rhino, I prepared an uninspired dinner of sautéed veggies, realizing too late that I should have made a carbohydrate-packed meal, like spaghetti.
“We’re going to be out walking for several hours tomorrow morning. I’m surprised you didn’t make pasta,” Scott said staring at the veggies on his plate.
“At least it’s not Brussel sprouts,” I said. “Eat your dinner.”
We hit the sack early in anticipation of getting our tracking fix the next morning. The thrill of walking in the bush, knowing there are wild animals about, is hard to explain. I am just grateful that we both enjoy doing it together.
“What’s that noise?” I asked groggily into the ski beanie I had pulled down over my face earlier in the night.
“Another camper must have climbed into their car and started up the engine to get warm. I don’t blame them. I’ve never experienced this kind of cold,” Scott said from underneath our duvet. Botswana deserts are seriously frigid at night.
“Brrr. In the middle of the night?” I rolled over and pulled the blanket over my head. I went into the fetal position and shoved my icy feet between Scott’s warm, thermal underwear-clad thighs. Several minutes went by. The noise from the engine continued.
I pulled the blanket back. “I see headlights. Do you think it could be our rangers, here to pick us up for the walk?” I asked.
“Can’t be. It’s the middle of the night. And it’s freezing.”
Scott sat up to unzip the tent flap, letting more frosty air in at the same time.
“Uh-oh. It must be five-thirty. It’s Store and Lap, our guides. No time for coffee. Get up.” Rousting me rudely from my warm cocoon, Scott called out to the rangers, “We’re coming now-now.” We quickly pulled on some clothes (all of our clothes), plunged our hands into our gloves, and stumbled to the waiting vehicle.
With Store and Lap taking up all the room in the cab, we had to sit in the back of the open sided game viewer, while freezing for the forty-minute drive. When Lap slid the cab window open to ask if we were comfortable, a blast of warm tropical air from the heater wafted over my face.
“Ha-ha,” I said through chattering teeth. “A polar bear wouldn’t be comfortable in this weather.” Then I bent over and placed my face in the window opening, so that he couldn’t shut it.
As the sun rose and we began to thaw, we started noticing mounds of rhino droppings along the road. Occasionally, Lap stopped the vehicle to examine the spoor from his open window before driving on. Finally, we stopped next to a particularly fresh pile and parked. We climbed out of the back and stood next to Lap and his considerable body heat.
Store prepared his rifle, which surprised me because I had heard that guides in Botswana didn’t carry rifles. Maybe it was for poachers, I thought, or as a defense against poachers who wouldn’t hesitate to shoot at anyone who stood in their way. The war on poaching is real.
Walking single file through the thicket, we were hot on the trail of the white rhino whose poo we had parked near. Store led the way darting through the bush like a small Duiker antelope. While he barely had to bend at the waist to negotiate the path, Scott and I practically had to crab walk to clear some of the thorny thicket. After almost thirty minutes of brisk tracking, I said breathlessly to Scott, “Yep, I should have made spaghetti last night.” Thankfully, Store stopped periodically to listen to the bush and to test the warmth of dung he found along the way. It was so cold I was tempted to shove my fist into the steamiest mounds.
Ducking and darting we went, until Lap clicked his fingers and brought our attention to a rhino just ahead.
“Don’t make a sound,” Store said in a whisper.
We circled around and came to the edge of an open area dominated by long, dry grass and a few trees. Across the pan we saw two adult rhinos intent on grazing. A young male walked back and forth around them in a seemingly empty-headed fashion.
“He’s marking his territory,” Store said. “He’s also trying to disguise the direction of his movements.”
Three times, using bushes as cover, we approached closer to the rhinos. Then, all at once, the three rhinos lifted their heads and peered intently in our direction. I held my breath. After a minute, they turned and trotted off into thick brush.
What was it that gave us away? Did the wind shift direction? Rhinos have enormous ears, which they use to listen for any potential threat nearby, so it was possible they heard us. Probably, they smelled us. Lap’s strong-smelling cologne might have tipped our hand. Trackers usually strive to have as little man-made scent on them as possible, so I was surprised by the amount of cologne that Lap wore. It didn’t matter. I didn’t need to set eyes on the animal to make tracking a satisfying experience. It was almost more fun to keep following them and interpret their actions by their footprints. Like reading their day planner. When Scott found an animal, he saw it as the icing on the cake. We both got our fix.
It was well after noon by the time Lap and Store dropped us back at our camp. The first order of business was coffee. We are coffee addicts with no less than three French presses on board, in case one broke. Though a lot of the best coffee in Southern and Eastern Africa is exported, there is still strong, delicious coffee to be found.
Later, after long, much needed naps in the warm sun, I grilled prime Botswana T-bone steaks with a red wine, mushroom sauce. It was another simple, inexpensive meal cooked using one pan over a single propane burner.
“Tracking rhinos in the morning, T-bone at dusk…I could get used to this,” I said with a contented sigh looking up into the giant pod mahogany tree. “This is the spice of life.”
I realized that more than anything, I loved our new lifestyle. Sleeping atop and driving Ndoto, being out in African nature twenty-four seven, not knowing what tomorrow would bring, was more satisfying than I had dreamed.
KUBU, AN ISLAND IN AN OLD SEA
In a vast sea of hard, bleached white by the sun, seemingly never-ending landscape, a sixty-five-foot high hulk of granite, Kubu Island, suddenly looms up on the horizon beckoning those who dared. The island sits amidst Makgadikgadi Pan, a vast forty-thousand-year-old dry lake in what is now the largest salt flat in the world.
Though it looked it, the pan surrounding Kubu Island isn’t always firm enough to drive on. Cars could get stuck in the muck after the rains, so we looked forward to the six-hour crossing to Kubu Island with excitement and trepidation.
The route to the edge of the pan took us through several small villages, but not in a straightforward fashion. When least expected, the road would suddenly branch into five or more sandy lanes. We drove slowly until friendly villagers pointed the right way. They knew all mzungus were going to the same place—Kubu.
After several hours, we finally came to the pan. Scott brought the front wheels to the edge of what had once been an expansive body of water teeming with life. Now it contained nothing but a sea of dry, hard chalk.
We sat in silence trying to take the entire nothing in. The white of the pan, and the blue of the sky looked limitless. The pan was flat and monotone, yet mysterious. It felt like we were stepping into a scene of a sci-fi movie where the curious but unprepared, protagonists walk down an endless landing-strip-sized hallway filled with nothing but light. At once, I understood why people make the effort to get to Kubu, and I hadn’t even arrived there yet. We continued to gaze at the ethereal landscape before us.
“This is what I imagine people see when they say they have ‘walked towards the light.’” I said. “Like a near-death experience.”
“No, the near-death experience came when we drove to Angie’s G-Spot. Or that time in Johannesburg,” Scott said referring to the time he was mugged in 2005 by four men with knives. “This is way better.”
There were two tracks before us. One led straight into the heart of the pan and the other skirted the edge for some kilometers. Just as we were deciding to take what we thought was the more firmly packed route around the pan, a lime green Volkswagen Bug barreled passed, leapt onto the pan in a single bound, and headed straight down the middle of the ancient lakebed. A moment later, a new model SUV vehicle appeared in our rearview mirror and stopped behind us.
A couple got out of the car and approached. “Hi. Are you going to Kubu Island?” the man asked excitedly. “We’ve never been. Have you?”
“This is our first time too,” Scott said when the man took a breath.
“How about we go together in case one of us breaks down. I’m Wolf and this is my wife, Trix,” Wolf said extending his hand.
“Hi, Trix, I’m Tris. Pleased to meet you.” And I was. But I was puzzled that someone with a newer SUV would want to team up with a forty-year-old Land Rover.
“I’m not sure how much help we would be to you,” I said. “We have one speed: slow. And we have to stop periodically to add oil to our engine.” I didn’t say that the other reason we made regular stops was to stretch and restore feeling to our arses.
“That’s okay,” Wolf said. “We aren’t in any rush. And I have a GPS with the coordinates of Kubu already loaded.” Wolf grabbed a portable GPS out of his car and held it up so that we could all see the screen. “We are supposed to go left here,” he said pointing to pink squiggles in the direction of the rim route, “then drive north for twenty-one kilometers to a veterinary checkpoint. So, why don’t we go together?”
“Sure, okay,” Scott said, appreciating the addition of a working GPS to the team since ours had been giving us trouble. Even though Wolf had the GPS, he wanted Ndoto to lead the way.
We were almost to the veterinary checkpoint when Ndoto started to speed up without any pressure on the gas pedal. Scott began using his legs and arms all at once to slow her down. He leaned down into the foot well and tried to pull the gas pedal up, but that didn’t help, so he shifted Ndoto to neutral and pumped the brakes the rest of the way to the checkpoint.
Like most of the veterinary checkpoints in Botswana, this one consisted of a fence, a wooden gate, a small abode, and some clothes drying on a line. We knew that a man or a woman, usually in a white coat, would hand us a dusty ledger to enter our names and our car registration and ask us to drive through a shallow ditch filled with disinfectant.
Stopping short of the tire cleanse area, Scott left the car in neutral with the engine running and the emergency brake on. He opened the hood and leaned deep inside the engine compartment. Wolf and Trix pulled up behind us and came over to see why Ndoto was eating Scott.
“The bolt on the rod between the carburetor and the accelerator is gone,” Scott said.
Now, Scott, as far as I knew, had never seen an accelerator rod before that day. Tinkering with cars was not his thing. When I was sixteen, my mom not only taught me minor plumbing repairs, she also taught me how to change the oil and filter on a car. After I’d met Scott, I was the one to take our car in for oil changes and repairs. Scott had never worked on a car before Ndoto, so I watched him with some amusement and some wonder. Meanwhile, Wolf and Trix stood by watching Scott’s every move.
“Wolf, maybe you and Trix shouldn’t wait for us,” I said. “Scott isn’t a mechanic and neither am I. We might be here for days.”
Wolf gave Scott a “band of brothers” look and said what guys who didn’t understand anything about cars would say: “He seems to know what he is doing.” He said it in a way that made me feel disloyal to our platoon of four.
“I see what has happened,” Scott said in the authoritative way Cliff Clavin would’ve explained things on the 1980’s TV show, Cheers. “It’s a little-known fact that nuts and bolts can jiggle themselves loose on rough roads.” He opened the side door, extracted the tool bin, and dug around inside it for something that would hold the rod arm in place. “There, that ought to hold it,” Scott said after attaching a small hose clamp and a strip of duct tape for good measure. Then he stowed the tool bin, greeted the gatekeeper, signed the checkpoint ledger, and drove through the disinfectant ditch, all in one take. We waited for Wolf and Trix on the other side of the gate.
I have rarely seen someone look at Scott with such admiration as they did. I could tell they had gotten the complete wrong impression of Scott’s mechanic abilities.
“Now I am even happier that we are driving into the pan together,” Wolf said when he met up with us. “I didn’t know we would be traveling with a mechanic. You fixed the problem so quickly.”
Scott climbed behind the wheel. and I could almost hear, Ah, shucks, tweren’t nothin’.
“Okay, spill,” I said as we led the way onto the pan. “How did you know what to do? Is there even such a thing as an accelerator rod?”
“Well, I just kept pulling and pushing things until the racing stopped. If it’s not called an accelerator rod, it should be.”
“Wolf and Trix think you are some sort of fix-it superman now. I hope we don’t have any really serious breakdowns.”
From the checkpoint, we drove seven kilometers and turned right. Seventeen kilometers farther, we would have Kubu Island in view, if all went well.
Driving on the pearl-white salt pan with the stark blue sky all around us, felt like we were hovering on the surface of a flat-topped cloud. Mirages of huge oceans or fields of pale wheat, suddenly appeared in the distance. Nonexistent islands seemed to float in the air. With no landmarks and no points to use for dead reckoning but the sun, we thought more than once that we might be lost. Whenever we slowed down Wolf pulled alongside, pointed at his GPS, and threw Scott a thumbs-up to confirm we were driving the correct direction.
“Hey, Wolf. Since you have the GPS, why don’t you lead the way?” Scott asked after the first time.
“That’s okay, you’re doing fine,” Wolf said, causing Scott to shake his head in bemusement and drive on.
Finally, we had Kubu in sight.
“Whoa,” we both said at the same time, relieved to finally see it and awed at the sight of the massive mound of granite in the middle of nowhere. In the Tswana language, Kubu means “hippopotamus” and that was exactly what it looked like from a distance, a gigantic beached hippo. Scott made a beeline for the island, with Wolf hot on Ndoto’s heels.
Arrival at Kubu Island seemed more like a lunar landing than a docking. Its otherworldliness made me feel like I was in some sort of parallel dimension. It was quiet. Except for the flies, there wasn’t much wildlife.
There are only thirteen campsites set amongst the giant baobab trees and granite, so the nightly population of Kubu is just a handful of strangers having a shared experience.
Scott and I quickly walked to the highest point on the small island to watch the colors surrounding Kubu change from white, to light-gray, to shimmering golden-yellow in the setting sun.
“Brian would love this,” I said because baobab trees, Brian’s favorite, dotted the island. The spindly branches of the thick trunked trees reached out in all directions at once like a compass rose on a dial. Pale in color, they looked like octopus ghosts with arms stretched out to a distant shore. Or like a cluster of old timers outside an English pub, who, when asked for directions to the next village, assuredly pointed in nine different directions at once. (This happened to us more than once when we cycled through rural Great Britain.)
The baobab tree is older than man and far more resilient. It’s a massive succulent that absorbs water in the rainy season, then provides fruit in the dry season, when there is little else around to sustain life. They live very long lives, more than three thousand years. We took it as a sign of good luck that one such venerated behemoth dominated our campsite.
We made our way to the opposite side of the island to watch the sun disappear over the ends of the earth. After sunset, it was instantly dark. It was like watching a good movie all the way to The End, and then the screen goes black.
Finding our way back to camp with a flashlight, we settled down to sundowners and were soon joined by Trix and Wolf. Again, they raved about Scott’s mechanic skills. Wolf refused to believe that the main reason Scott could fix Ndoto so quickly, was that there were so few parts under her hood to choose from. There’s the engine, the carburetor, the radiator, and evidently an accelerator rod. There is so much empty space under the hood, it’s almost possible for a person to stand inside the engine compartment.
Later, nestled under our duvet in our cozy nest, we agreed it had been one of those days that made us feel romantic, adventurous, and brave.
“If I could, I would beam myself to Kubu twice a day, for sunrise and sunset, for the rest of my life—to stop everything and enjoy nature’s beauty and think of nothing but this is beautiful, this is real. That is my kind of meditation,” I said.
Apparently, Kubu relaxed Scott too. He was already snoring.
In the morning, we walked completely around the island and stopped at an ancient ruin. A sign near a low stone wall explained that it had been built by the Great Zimbabwe civilization more than four hundred years ago. Archeologists who worked on the site thought it might have been a remote camp where tribal rituals happened, possibly circumcision. No one knew for sure. It definitely had the feel of a place where something significant had happened. Maybe there had been a ferocious battle there in the distant past. Whatever it was, we kept looking over our shoulders, and we didn’t feel like lingering.
“You feel it too,’ I said to Scott. Usually I was the one to pick up on weird vibes, but I could tell by his uncharacteristically quick pace that he felt uncomfortable hanging around there too.
By the time we arrived back at camp after our walk, Wolf and Trix were packed up and ready to follow us back to civilization. But we were continuing east to Nata, and they were going south to Francistown, so we soon parted ways.
“Thanks for leading the way,” Wolf said waving goodbye. “I hope that accelerator rod won’t give you any more trouble. But if it does, I’m sure you can handle it.”
“Aw, thanks, Wolf,” Scott said giving me a less-than-humble grin.
I rolled my eyes. “Oh, brother.”
Confidence boosted, Scott made a beeline across the pan straight toward Nata, but we soon hit goopy mud. It took us six hours to get to Nata using the longer, less mucky route. The surface of the road was unpredictable and inconsistent. Corrugation made our teeth chatter. Then the road suddenly became so thick with sand that the wheels would refuse to spin. After that, it was so deeply rutted, I was sure we would overturn. Occasionally, we passed gigantic lone baobabs or tiny communities consisting of just three huts.
Finally, we arrived at Nata Lodge, a popular overland stop for people coming from, or going to, the pans or the Okavango Delta. We marveled at the running water and ice-cold beer. Clean clothes felt like new. The sparkling pool and the promise of rib eye for dinner felt like a reward. Well done. Welcome back to earth.
We sat at the outdoor restaurant sipping beers under the soft light of a full moon.
“During World War II they used to call it a bomber’s moon. Now it’s a poacher’s moon,” Scott said quietly.
We used to love a full moon, but since meeting Scott’s flying instructor, Bruce, who taught us about the war on poaching and how poachers use the moon to help locate rhino, we view the full moon as a sad reminder that elephants and rhino were being brutally killed at that moment for their tusks or horns.
Elephant tusks and rhino horns and pangolin scales do not cure cancer. They don’t enhance sexual excitement. They have no benefits at all, except to the animals that wear them. While we were sitting at the camp bar sipping beer, animals were being slaughtered for no reason but to satisfy the vanity or greed of humans.
I believe that the way to stop the market in horn and tusk, and other animal parts such as tiger paws or pangolin scales, is to change people’s thinking. Naysayers tell me that isn’t possible. I disagree.
Purchasing anything made of ivory (or rhino horn or pangolin scales, etc.) does nothing but kill innocent animals, contribute to the extinction of a species, and make the Chinese or Vietnamese businessmen who order the slaughter, rich. Be it informing my friends about poaching or supporting our friends who track down poachers, I am more resolved than ever to do whatever I can to stop the madness.
CAMPED AT NO CAMP
“The elephants come every day, but the lions come only some days,” a gas station attendant said on the road to Kasane.
I liked Botswana more every day. As far as I was concerned, a country where you could find wild animals at the local fuel stop is a fine place indeed.
We had our hearts set on camping along the river at the Chobe Safari Lodge, a favorite overnight stop on previous trips. When we arrived late in the day, we were told that both the camp and lodge were fully booked.
We had a drink on the terrace overlooking the pool and pondered where we would spend the night. It had been a long day, and we were hot, sweaty, and tired. I returned to the reception desk to ask if any camping spots or rooms had become available, but none had. The receptionist must have had a long day in a hot Land Rover at some point in her life too because she leaned over the counter and said, “You might try asking about ‘No Camp’ at the campground bar. Sometimes they will let people stay there.”
“No Camp?” I asked.
“Just go to the campsite bar and ask about No Camp,” she repeated.
We walked along the river to the camp bar and up a wooden ramp to a wide deck perched over the river. There were no customers, only a bartender who stood behind the bar polishing wine glasses in slow motion. We waited for him to notice us, but he continued polishing in a zoned-out daze.
“Maybe he’s sleep-polishing,” I said in a whisper. “You know, like a sleepwalker who only gets as far as the stemware cupboard.”
“Good afternoon,” Scott said. The bartender lifted his head and gazed at us under heavy lids.
“Yes,” he said.
I worried he was like the groundskeeper on Rouen’s land and that he wouldn’t understand a thing we said.
“Ginger or Maryanne?” I asked. The bartender seemed to comprehend, but too fatigued to answer. Or maybe thought I would judge him if he answered Ginger.
Scott forged ahead. “They said at reception that all the campsites are taken. We have a Land Rover with rooftop tent so we don’t take up much space. We were told there might be space at, uh … No Camp?”
“Yes, you may camp there,” the man said running his bar towel over a glass for the third or thirtieth time.
“That’s great,” Scott said loudly to jolt him out of his zombie-like state.
We waited.
“I see you are busy, but would you mind showing us where it is?” Scott asked.
The man put down the glass slowly, slung the towel over his shoulder, and lumbered toward the doorway.
We followed him down the wooden ramp to a wide swinging gate made of a single thick pipe. On the other side of the gate, there was a shaded, brush-free patch of dirt that fronted the river. Along the riverbank was a short wooden fence with a sign that read “Beware of Crocodile.”
The bartender unlatched the gate and swung it open. It was then that I noticed the sign on the gate that read “No Camp,” as in No Camping. “This is where you may camp,” he said.
“No Camp” was the best campsite at the Chobe Safari Lodge. Hippos laid submerged in the river not twenty feet from where we sat during the day, and at night they munched their way through the grass near Ndoto. We watched a crocodile stalk and chomp a Hammerkop (Afrikaans for hammerhead), an odd-looking, medium-sized, short-legged brown bird with a head shaped like an anvil. A Hammerkop tends to wade in slow motion in shallow water, looking for little frogs or fish to gobble up. Their predictable movements make them easy prey for crocs.
The quirky and handsome bird had become one of my favorites. They build massive domed nests, sometimes using as many as ten thousand sticks. Their homes are strong enough for a human to stand on. I was very sorry to see the Hammerkop end up as croc food. But it was mercifully quick. One minute the bird was there, the croc lunged, and he was gone.
The next day, our all-day game drive through Chobe National Park was one of the best and worst days of the journey. The most challenging terrain for Ndoto is deep sand. Almost all the roads in Chobe National Park are layered with deep sand. We had to use low gear most of the day, so she labored and overheated. There was scant shade to be found in Chobe, so we also became dehydrated and overheated. It was a taxing day for all of us.
It wasn’t as though we didn’t see wildlife. A leopard jumped out of a tree and loped into bushes next to a spot where we were temporarily stuck in the sand. Another time we spied, through binoculars, an enormous herd of elephants coming across the plain, en masse, on their way to the river. Scott guessed where they would cross the road and positioned Ndoto between the river and the elephants, and we waited.
They came in silence, as they usually did, and when they arrived at the spot where we had parked, they treated Ndoto as if she were an island in a stream. There were hundreds of elephants. As they drew near, they split their column and passed around Ndoto. Some of the mothers and aunties eyed us as they went by with their calves in tow, but not one of the elephants seemed nervous, or afraid, or perturbed. We didn’t speak for the twenty minutes it took for the herd to pass.
The relaxed demeanor of the elephants surprised me a little. Elephants have extremely close relationships with their offspring and with others in their herd. The most dangerous place to be in the wild is between a mother elephant (a mother anything, really) and her baby. Elephants will mourn their dead and defend the herd as a united front.
I once watched a small breeding herd of elephants calmly feeding in a mopane grove. Several new babies kept close to their mothers, flinging their little trunks around as if they were still unsure of their purpose. Suddenly, the matriarch rumbled and trumpeted loudly. Several other mothers and aunties immediately came to her side. Six females drew in a tight circle, facing outward, with their butts touching, ready to deal with any threat. The little babies somehow knew to stay underneath the moms. After a few minutes, the threat must have passed, or maybe it was just a drill because the adults calmly went back to eating, and the babies returned to twirling their trunks.
Fortunately, that day in Chobe, the females did not see Ndoto as a threat. They noticed us for sure. Some turned to look at us, stopping briefly to raise their trunks and sniff at Ndoto, but they barely broke their stride. They were on a mission to get to water. An elephant must drink about a bathtub-sized amount of water every day. I met a woman once who watched elephants drain a small swimming pool in one go.
I wished I could have filmed the experience from overhead. A drone would work, but they aren’t allowed in national parks, and I didn’t think the animals would appreciate the noise anyway. If we had been able to film from overhead, it would have shown Ndoto floating in a sea of elephants.
Throughout the rest of the day, Ndoto continued to overheat. The noises she made sounded like a death rattle. The heat and deep sand of Chobe was too much. I thought we had killed her. Upon exiting the park, we drove straight to a garage.
Serendipity always play a part in our travels, and that day was no different. The Zimbabwean owner/mechanic of the garage owned several Land Rovers. He was especially passionate about old Land Rovers. While he told Scott about his daughter at university in the U.S., he resurrected Ndoto and sorted out her overheating problem. Before we left, he handed us several yards of gasket that he had taken from one of his old Landys, so that we could seal the gaps in Ndoto’s door frames and maybe keep the dust outside, instead of inside.
While Scott watched the owner fix Ndoto, I sat in the shade of an enormous pink bougainvillea tree across the street. A slender woman, clad in an ankle length dress with a matching headband made up of all the colors in an eight-pack Crayola Crayon box, set up shop next to me. Her store consisted of a small table covered in neat rows of vending machine sized snacks and a cardboard box of warm soft drinks. And it was a drive-thru. Customers pulled up alongside and bought items through their car windows. At times, there was a line of cars waiting to buy a tepid bottle of Coca Cola or a small bag of nuts or crisps. As far as I knew, she was the only drive-thru in town. I could imagine her as the owner of a food truck one day, cornering the snack and ambient-temperature soft drink market.
Almost immediately, Ndoto’s fever returned to normal. She was well enough to enter a new country, Zimbabwe, the next day. We promised her, and each other, that we wouldn’t go through that much deep sand again, if we could help it.
THE ELEPHANTS OF HWANGE
Entering Zimbabwe was predictably tedious. Instead of orderly lines, people crowded the immigration counter and pushed their way toward the narrow window. Forms were handed out one by one to each traveler. Every few seconds, the immigration official had to stop what he was doing, reach under the counter for a form, and place it into the waiting hand that stretched through the window. That was aggravating, but there were so many people pushing in around me, I was growing queasy. Squirming my way to the counter, I asked for a stack of immigration forms, so that I could hand them out, but this was not allowed.
Finally, it was our turn at the window. Fees were accepted, passports were stamped, and we oozed our way out of the human clog and into fresh air. But we weren’t done yet. We had to clear Ndoto through customs in a different building. Fortunately, the man behind the window at customs was friendly and efficient.
“I saw you drive up. I have been waiting for you,” he said with a warm smile. “These old Landys are strong. Your vehicle reminds me of my childhood. There were a lot of these Series III Land Rovers around then. They were the sturdiest farm vehicles in those days. Still are,” he said wistfully, stamping our paperwork. “Where are you headed?”
“Hwange,” Scott said.
“Ah, you will love it. There are many elephants there.”
“Yes. That’s why we are going,” I said.
Hwange is the largest national park in Zimbabwe, and, like its little sister, Mana Pools, it is known for elephants. That alone made it worth going. But, as we drove through Hwange from Main Camp to Sinamatella Camp, we were troubled to see how nervous the elephants were behaving. Whenever they heard or saw our vehicle, they bolted into the bush as if running for their lives. Fluid from the temporal glands (a sign of stress) ran down the cheeks of the females.
Poaching of elephant ivory was at a crisis level in Africa. I wondered if their panic was due to poaching going on in the park. To see these magnificent beasts crashing into one another to flee humans, made me ashamed to be part of a race that would kill such an intelligent, sentient creature for greed or vanity.
“Oh Scott, it seems hopeless.” I didn’t want to be a cause of any added stress for the elephants, and all the joy had gone out of the game drive, so we returned to our camp on the escarpment at Sinamatella.
Camped next to us was a family from Harare, Zimbabwe’s capital city. We chatted with Brian and Angela over sundowners. They had recently returned to their birthplace of Zimbabwe after living in Zambia for several years. We mentioned to them that part of our itinerary included flying back to South Africa for Karl and Mandy’s wedding, but that we were unsure about where we’d store Ndoto while we were away.
“If you are in Zimbabwe at the time of the wedding, you are more than welcome to store your Landy in our driveway in Harare.”
“Really? Wow. That is an incredibly kind offer. You don’t even know us,” I said.
With true Southern African hospitality, Brian handed us a card with his cell number and said, “That doesn’t matter. We are happy to do it.”
It reminded me of all the folks in Hoedspruit who helped us find a place to stay while Scott earned his pilot’s license and of Lisl’s warm hospitality. Now an out-of-the-blue offer to store our forty-year-old vehicle, one that leaked oil regularly, was almost too hard to believe.
Southern Africans are without a doubt uncommonly generous, and their first instinct is to want to help, but I was beginning to think that Ndoto was the reason people were drawn to us. Ndoto was a rock star on wheels.
One of the reasons we were in Hwange, was to take part in a multi-day walking safari led by bush legend, Leon Varley. Leon pioneered walking safaris, so we felt lucky to have the opportunity to walk in the bush with someone so experienced.
Leon collected Scott and me at the Sinamatella ranger office. Ndoto would stay parked in camp for four days under the watchful eye of Godfrey, Sinamatella’s camp attendant. While Leon drove us to his remote camp in the Hwange Valley, we got to know our fellow participants, which included Helen and Jan from Australia and a twenty-seven-year-old tall and lanky, yet graceful Indian man with a name impossible to pronounce without making it sound like something delicious at a restaurant. I asked him to pronounce his name for me again. Still, my ears and vocal cords refused to join forces, so I asked if he would mind if I called him Twigga, which was Swahili for giraffe, the elegant walker.
“I like it,” he said smiling.
For the next three days, our small band of travelers fell into a comfortable routine of storytelling and long walks in the bush. It felt like what a safari might have been in the old days.
We rose at five thirty each morning, woken by camp staff who brought a basin of warm water to our tent. After coffee and a light breakfast, we walked for three hours encountering elephants, Cape buffalos, lions, and sometimes soft game, like impala remains in a tree, placed there by a hungry leopard. By 10:30 a.m., we were back at camp sitting down to a substantial brunch. Then it was free time to nap or read before going out for another two or three hour walk. Drinks and dinner were waiting for us when we returned to camp at dusk.
Five to six hours of walking each day over rough terrain was good for our muscles after so many days of sitting in Ndoto. I missed her though, especially at night. Leon’s cots were comfortable enough, but nothing could beat Ndoto’s 800 thread count sheets, memory foam mattress, and fluffy down comforter. Sleeping in the same bed every night went a long way to making our expedition vehicle feel like home.
Leon’s camp was rustic, but we got clean under bucket showers, dined by candlelight, and enjoyed happy hour at an unparalleled bush bar. Leon had every type of liquor and mixer you would expect to find at a midtown Manhattan cocktail party. He had beer and wine too. Time spent around the campfire before dinner was always highly entertaining. Leon not only pioneered walking safaris in Zimbabwe, he is also a gifted storyteller.
But the best part of Leon’s camp was its location amongst shade trees, thirty feet above a dry riverbed. My siesta time was usually spent perched on the bank watching small groups of elephants dig holes with their tusks, trunks, and feet in the sand to extract water. It was the dry season, so elephants were starting to have to walk farther and farther for water, or they had to dig for it. They would dig until they hit the water table. Then, the elephants sucked and ejected sand and dirty water with their trunks, until the water ran clear.
Females with small offspring were the most common visitors. The elephants weren’t bothered by me and may not even have known I was there. I hoped they didn’t. They were thirsty, but they weren’t desperate. Moms dug deep into the riverbed before drinking, while their calves swept the sand with their trunks or walked under mom’s legs or buried their faces in the newly dug hole. They were quiet. Not a tummy rumble or trumpet to be heard.
When male elephants converged on the riverbed from different directions, instead of digging new holes, they patiently waited their turn to drink at the same hole.
I could have sat there the entire four days just watching the elephants. In fact, one day I skipped the afternoon walk entirely and spent three hours in blissful solitude on the bank. I shot photos and videos of elephants coming and going, digging and drinking, safe for the moment from poachers.
When Scott returned to camp after the walk, he sat with me on the riverbank and watched a few elephants drinking from the holes.
“You saw more than we did, I think,” he said with a smile.
“I don’t know about that, but after watching these elephants, I’m even more committed to doing whatever I can to stop their slaughter. No one needs an elephant tusk but an elephant.”
KAPENTA AND KARIBA
Crossing the largest man-made lake in the world, Lake Kariba in Zimbabwe, had long been on our travel list. Scott especially was a fan of taking long distance ferries whenever we got the chance in Africa. In 2005, we took the Volta ferry through Ghana—though I remember little of the two-day journey, due to my malarial haze—and in 2010, we time-traveled aboard the historic MV Liemba ferry on Lake Tanganyika.
On Lake Kariba, we were two among a group of only eighteen passengers making the overnight crossing from Mlibisi, an embarkation station for the Lake Kariba car and passenger ferry, to Kariba. Half the passengers were also transporting an overland vehicle.
Perhaps because Ndoto was the oldest of the vehicles, the ferry crew decided that she should go below decks. To fit through the opening of the hold, the rack holding the rooftop tent had to come off. We were told we’d possibly have to deflate the tires too. Crew and passengers pitched in and the rack was off in less than ten minutes. Without her tent, Ndoto looked undressed.
I could barely watch as Scott lined Ndoto’s tires up on two narrow metal ramps and reversed her over the water, onto the boat, and below decks. She barely fit, even with the rack off, but we didn’t have to deflate the tires. Two beefier and newer, more kitted-out overland vehicles remained parked on the open deck at the bow.
Once underway and the bar was open, we met interesting people who explored Africa the way we did, except no one else had a forty-year-old vehicle, and no one else had a Land Rover. Tim and Yvonne from Durban, South Africa had a drool-worthy overland truck with all the bells and whistles. In addition to owning a game reserve (no one in Africa did just one thing), Tim also designed and outfitted custom overland vehicles. We again wondered if it was because of Ndoto or just another example of Southern African hospitality, but after chatting for less than twenty minutes, he invited us to be guests at his reserve in South Africa.
Scott and I slept outside on the top deck of the ferry where we could watch the play of lights on the water. After dark, the lake became a brightly lit neighborhood. More than one thousand fishing boats cruised the waters through the night in search of kapenta, a sardine-like fish the size of an adult’s pinkie finger. The rigging on the boats was laden with lights. Since the fish were drawn to light, the brighter the lights, the more fish were caught. Kapenta fishermen took the adage “outshine your competition” to a new level. I could have read a book by the light being thrown off the vessels.
When the holds were full, the boats returned to shore where the kapenta were salted and set out to dry in the sun. Kapenta is a staple for many Zimbabweans and Zambians so is in high demand. But the sustainable number of fishing boats on Kariba is around five hundred, not one thousand. Overfishing is only one of the issues surrounding Lake Kariba.
Kariba Dam holds back the water for the world’s largest man-made lake. During construction of the dam between 1958 and 1962, more than six thousand animals were rescued from the rising waters and relocated in what became known as “Operation Noah.”
Each time we visited the Zambezi Valley, we heard rumors that the Kariba Dam wall was at risk of collapse—rumors that got our attention whenever we camped downstream at Mana Pools. It turned out they weren’t rumors. Massive outflows over the years have eroded the dam wall and caused cracks to form.
If the dam breaks, there isn’t an ark big enough to save everyone. Millions of lives would be lost and a key source of electricity would vanish in an instant. Countless animals and habitats would disappear because of the torrential flooding.
Meanwhile, Scott and I, along with many others, continue to camp downstream at Mana Pools because it is irresistibly beautiful and has elephants that stand on their hind legs to reach tender new shoots at the tops of trees.
At 8:00 a.m., the ferry docked at Kariba, a town built to provide housing for Kariba Dam builders. Now, it’s a sleepy little resort town at the end of the lake. It even had its own casino. Party-sized houseboats crowded the harbor. Zebras, hippos, baboons, and elephants roamed freely through the streets. But the place felt economically depressed. Animals don’t carry wallets.
What Kariba lacked was foreign exchange. Tourism was down in most of Zimbabwe. At the time we were there in 2015, it felt like a country waiting to exhale. Government policies put into effect by the current administration hadn’t helped matters. Some wondered if things would be better after Mugabe left office. As one Zimbabwean taxi driver said to us, “Sometimes it’s better to have the devil you know.” But thirty-seven years under Mugabe’s regime had nearly ruined the country. There was a brief period of excitement and hope when Mugabe finally stepped down in 2017, but Zimbabwe continues to be strapped for cash and ruled by inept politicians.
Zimbabweans are among the most hopeful, stubborn, and resilient people on the continent. They’ve lived through colonialism, isolationism, war, independence, farm takeovers, and more. They are survivors, and they believe they will always survive. I hope they are right.
THE OLD PETAUKE ROAD
The Old Petauke Road in Zambia is one of those scenic but rough roads worth every bruise and grain of grit collected along its 180-kilometer, ten-hour drive. It is old, rural, and wild Africa. There are hardly any vehicles. Pedestrians exit the roads onto narrow footpaths that lead to tiny villages. The villagers coexist with wild animals that have always lived there too. Plus, the Old Petauke Road is the shortcut that would bring us to South Luangwa, where the light, the river, and the animals combine to make me feel as if I am part of nature’s artwork, like I’ve climbed inside wild beauty. I couldn’t wait to get there.
As we bumped along the dusty Petauke road, we again stopped and gave rides to people. Because Ndoto’s passenger door was difficult to open, Scott sometimes came around to help our riders out of the car when we arrived at their villages. Sometimes, he had to help them in too.
We came upon an old barefoot woman carrying a large sack in her arms who must have been walking for more than an hour in the dust and heat. Scott slowed to a stop.
“Would you like a lift?” I asked through the open window. But she didn’t seem to understand, so I opened the door and moved to the center. I patted the seat next to me and motioned that she could join us if she wished. She moved toward Ndoto without hesitation, but eyed the climb into the seat as if it was Mount Everest. Scott quickly jumped out and came around.
He put his hand out to her, like a gentleman requesting the next dance. “May I?” he asked.
She put down her sack, which was at least half as tall as she was, and submitted her old and frail body to Scott. He lifted her easily into Ndoto, then lifted her sack (with some difficulty) to the rack, and climbed into the driver’s seat.
“I think she is hauling potatoes,” he said in a low voice. “That sack must weigh twenty-five pounds.”
It was another four kilometers at least, until she indicated that Scott should turn left into a dusty open space that looked like a village meeting point. A handful of men, women, and children sat on makeshift benches in the shade of a tall tree. All eyes were on Ndoto as Scott, a tall, blond-haired, blue-eyed, shorts-and-T-shirt-clad chauffeur, pulled alongside, opened the door and extended a hand to our passenger as if she were royalty. He lifted her down and reached up for her sack of potatoes. The old woman showed her appreciation with two claps of cupped hands and a wave, before lifting her sack and setting off down a narrow footpath that hopefully led to her abode. For beings that looked sometimes as if they could break in two, African women are strong.
As we pulled away, Scott looked at the GPS and said, “There’s no way we’ll reach South Luangwa before dark. We’re going to have to camp in the bush.”
As anxious as I was to get there, I knew it was more prudent to spend the night in the bush, rather than run the risk of driving into an elephant, or hippo, or frail old woman in the dark. It was to be our first true bushcamp—unplanned, unfenced, secluded, and wild.
At dusk, we drove off the road, away from the river and into the bush. We weren’t noticed moving off the road, except by a small herd of agitated elephants. There wasn’t time to pick a perfect spot—soon it would be dark. Sunset does not happen gradually in the tropics. Twilight is skipped completely. There is sundown and then there is darkness.
We drove a short distance through low brush, before parking Ndoto in a small clearing surrounded by mopane trees. We decided against setting up the table and chairs or preparing a hot meal and opted for a bed picnic of cheese, bread, and apples. It felt good to be horizontal after our busy day.
It wasn’t long before the first hippo bellowed. A hyena whooped in the distance. Then elephants began to rumble and trumpet nearby—not surprising since mopane trees are a favorite of elephants, and we were camped in a grove of them. We couldn’t see clearly in the dark, but something large was right there in the bushes near our tent.
Because we had seen the agitated elephants and had heard a few tales about cheeky elephants damaging or overturning cars, we discussed an exit strategy. We left Ndoto’s doors unlocked and the key in the ignition so, if we had to, we could make a quick departure.
Scott had a gin and tonic, then another. I was tempted to join him. It had been a long, hot day of driving and bush taxi service on the Old Petauke Road. But I thought dulling our senses when there were wild animals about wouldn’t be prudent. Plus, I didn’t want to have to climb down the ladder to relieve my bladder in the middle of the night with all that wildlife around us.
“Don’t you think we should keep our wits about us—that we should be alert?”
“That’s just what the world needs. More lerts,” Scott said taking another sip of Gilbert’s Gin. Not a mistype. It wasn’t Gilbeys or Gordons. Certainly not Tanqueray, which we had run out of long ago. Gilbert’s was bottled on Lomagundi Road in a town called Stapleford in South Africa.
“That’s not what I mean by keeping your wits,” I said. “I’m talking about situational awareness and being switched on.”
“Well I’m tired and thirsty, and I’m switching off until dawn.”
Scott slept through the night. I had maybe two hours. There was no moon that night, so I couldn’t see what was going bump in the night around us. Each time I heard a rustle or heavy footfall, I peered out the front screen, then spun around and peered out the back, all night long like a dial on a game board. “What’s out there?” I said to myself straining my eyes to identify what looked like a hulk of an elephant but moved like a hippo. Piloerection occurred regularly. The hair on my neck stood up like bristles on a hairbrush.
I love the bush. I love sleeping in the wild. I had expert guide training at Ulovane, yet when it came down to my first real bushcamp, I was on edge. It was my first solo, the real deal.
“I never sleep so well as I do in Africa,” Scott said at sunrise.
“Sheesh. You missed it all,” I said with sleep-deprived exasperation.
“What did I miss?”
“I don’t know. But there was lots of it.”
A PILGRIMAGE TO SOUTH LUANGWA
My Mecca. After five months, we were finally there.
We were camped on the banks of the Luangwa River, one of the best riverbanks in the world for wildlife viewing. Elephants abound, even in camp. So much so that instead of the usual passports, cash, and other documents that travelers sometimes store in safes at reception, strongboxes at camps along the Luangwa River were sometimes full of citrus fruit, brought in by campers who had forgotten that an elephant will stop at nothing to get at a juicy orange. This proved true at Crocodile Valley Camp. One shell-shocked novice camped next to us fumed.
“An elephant broke into our Toyota last night and helped himself to whatever he wanted.”
I wanted to say, you should have a Land Rover. Instead I asked, “Did you have oranges?”
“Yes, but he took lots of other stuff too,” he said.
The elephants came into camp every night at Croc Valley, and, even though I left the gin, tonic, and limes in our cool box ready for five o’clock sundowners, the elephants never bothered Ndoto.
Monkeys and baboons were another story. In gangs, they cruised the campsite, at dawn and dusk, foraging, playing, and grooming. We usually woke to find a monkey on the roof of Ndoto peering in at us through the tent screen or using our tent fly as a trampoline. We couldn’t leave a single thing out, whether it was edible or man-made, not even for a second, or monkeys and baboons would grab it.
Despite the opportunistic monkeys, South Luangwa had long been a special place for me. Large herds of elephants came to the water every day to drink and play. Even the adults enjoyed playing in the water. The juvenile males engaged in mock shoving matches or entwined their trunks in greeting. The young females twirled their trunks or flopped on their sides in the shallow water, mouths wide open as if they were smiling, entreating their sisters to do the same.
Wildebeest were there too. They ran about erratically, and then stopped on a dime, as if they suddenly forgot what they were doing. Giraffe, baboons, and zebra crossed the river in front of camp. When the river was high, they used the bridge. But high water didn’t stop the elephants. They waded across, with nothing but the tips of their trunks poking out of the water.
The other reason Luangwa is so special is the light. The light there is softer, and the colors are crisper than most anywhere in Africa. Only Mana Pools in Zimbabwe, or the Okavango in Botswana can compare. If you could paint the light at South Luangwa, it would become a scene that most people imagined when they dreamt of a safari in Africa. For me, that light is most special at a camp called Flat Dogs.
When we first visited Flat Dogs in 2005, we could pitch our tent on a small wooden platform set into a tree. Elephants and hippo regularly walked beneath the platform. We would lie on our tummies and watch the elephants come up from the river and browse nearby or have a scratch against our tree—something I could do every day of my life and not be bored. It is still the best place in the world we’ve ever pitched a tent. Today, Flat Dogs has gone more upscale (or maybe the elephants were chasing too many campers to the security of the bar), but they no longer offered camping, in trees or elsewhere. Still, it is our favorite place to view elephants, so when we go nowadays, we book a canvas tent on the river right across from South Luangwa National Park. When I am at South Luangwa, I feel as if I am inside a beautiful painting. The air at Flat Dogs is uncommonly still, which adds to the feeling of being part of a painted image; never more so than the day I had one of the most unique elephant encounters I’d experienced in all my time in Africa.
It happened that first time we were at Flat Dogs. I climbed down the ladder of our tent platform and took a walk to the riverbank. Finding a lone wooden Adirondack chair, I sat and was soon completely engrossed in a book. After a while, I sensed something near me and looked up. A massive male elephant had approached in silence and had stopped directly beside me. He looked down and locked eyes with me. At first, I panicked and thought about running to the safely of the bar, but I knew that would be the worst thing I could do. Elephants, especially males, could be aggressive. Instead of being afraid, I told myself to enjoy the incredible experience. I became aware that his tail was relaxed and his posture nonthreatening. Because he was calm, I suddenly felt calm too. I wondered if he would mind if I reached my arm out to touch him but decided to let him make the first move, if he wanted to. He continued staring into my eyes for what seemed an eternity before moving slowly on down the bank. Afterwards, I was lightheaded (probably from holding my breath) but filled with utter joy and gratitude.
That experience, along with the light, is why we returned to Flat Dogs again and again and why we were there now; to watch herds of elephants coming and going across the river from the national park. Each time, I hoped to see my special elephant or one like him, curious and gentle. It was almost a pilgrimage.
“I’ll be back,” I said to Scott, who was enjoying a book inside the canvas tent. I walked along the bank and found the chair I was looking for. I closed my eyes and recalled our first time there, the encounter with the big bull elephant, and all the times after. Gratitude washed over me—for life, for Scott—my partner in joy and adventure, for our lifestyle, and, especially for being born to Joseph and Martha O’Kane. I didn’t grow up with much, but they taught me to appreciate all that came my way. I wiped away my tears and went back to the tent to give Scott a hug.
***
As reluctant as I was to leave the place where I was most thankful, we shouldn’t have planned our pilgrimage during the hot season. The warm, still air at Flat Dogs was way warmer than usual. Every day was over one hundred degrees. I was overheating regularly. Just like my mother, I couldn’t take the heat. We set our sights and our GPS on Kapishya located in the crisp air of the highlands. It would take two solid days of driving to get there, so for two more days and nights we’d suffer the same blazing heat as Flat Dogs, the kind of heat that turned my face bright red and made my body clammy. I hoped camping along the river at a place called Zikomo, one day’s drive away, would give me at least some relief.
TSETSE MADNESS
When we arrived at Zikomo, the owners of the camp took one look at me and brought emergency cooling measures to our campsite in the form of one truck battery connected to a 12-volt fan, wet towels, and a bucket of cold water for my feet.
“You look close to heat stroke,” one person said.
I don’t mind roughing it, but I am a wimp when it comes to the heat. With a fan blowing on my face and wet towels draped over my shoulders, I sat in the shade of a marula tree and stared at hippos in the river. I was overheated and grumpy. I took my discomfort out on Ndoto. Ndoto’s elderly pace meant we had to camp in the smothering heat for two more nights before we could begin our climb out of the valley.
“A newer vehicle would have easily got us to the highlands in one day,” I said glaring at Ndoto. It was the first time I had a critical word to say about her, and I immediately felt guilty. “Sorry, granny,” I said reaching over to pat her bumper.
Nighttime brought no relief from the heat. Scott hung the 12-volt fan inside our tent and laid a damp sarong over us both, so we could fall asleep. But the sarong quickly dried and lost its cooling power. Thirty minutes later, we were as hot as ever.
Long before dawn we were up, eating cans of ice-cold peaches out of the fridge.
“Scott, if we leave now, do you think we can get to Kapisha in the highlands by sunset?” I said while stabbing another peach with my fork. “I really gotta get out of this heat. It’s making me irritable.”
“Oh? I hadn’t noticed,” he said with a teasing smile. “We can’t make it all the way by sunset, but we could probably make it as far as the pontoon boat landing. Remember, we still have to cross the river. You keep fanning, I’ll pack,” he said putting the table and his chair in Ndoto.
Before we left, Scott swapped a few tools and some of his clothes for the 12-volt fan.
Crossing a river with Ndoto by pontoon ferry would be a first for us, so we were looking forward to it. We arrived at the camp adjacent to the pontoon crossing just after dusk and climbed into the rooftop tent. Once again, Scott set the fan up to blow over a sopping wet sarong that lay on our bodies.
“Ah, thanks, babe,” I said enjoying the hillbilly air-conditioning on my skin. “This works. I hope we won’t need the tools you swapped for this fan.”
“It was worth it,” he said. Even Scott, who never complained of the heat, was anxious to get out of it. That was how hot it was.
In the morning, I approached the man who operated the ferry. There was no one else at the camp, so we would probably be the only ones crossing that day.
“Good Morning,” I said.
“Good morning. How are you?” He didn’t wait for an answer before adding. “Call me, Pontoon Man.”
I could see he took as much pride in his vehicle, the pontoon boat, as I did in Ndoto. Maybe that was his superhero name, I thought.
“Hi, Pontoon Man. Call me, Ndoto Girl,” I said with a smile.
We walked together to the bank of the river looking for hippos upstream and down. One hippo had enjoyed three noisy courses just below our tent the night before. Chomp, chomp, chomp he went, mowing the short grass with his powerful lips. Seeing no hippos around now, I forged ahead with a special request.
“Pontoon Man, would you mind transporting me to the other side of the river? I want to film my husband loading Ndoto onto the pontoon and coming across.”
Pontoon Man was not keen on the idea at first. “There are crocodiles on the other side. You would have to wait with them until your vehicle crossed with your husband,” he said.
“Crocodiles? Hmm.” I was anxious to film the only hand-pulled ferry crossing we might ever do, so I said, “It’s too hot for crocodiles,” and paid him to take me across the river and leave me there.
“Keep your eyes open, Ndoto Girl,” he said as he pulled away, leaving me alone on the bank.
By the time the pontoon touched the opposite bank, I began feeling vulnerable. While I waited for Scott and Ndoto, I constantly scanned my surroundings. I never spotted a croc, but I did see several slow-moving elephants down river. What I couldn’t see were animals that might be lurking in the thick, tangled brush behind me. Surely, if they were there, they would be in a heat-induced coma, I hoped. I was almost there myself. Sweat poured off me, no one’s version of a Ndoto (dream) girl.
After what seemed like an eternity, Scott carefully maneuvered Ndoto down a steep section of the bank and onto the pontoon ferry.
The ferry consisted of ten steel barrels lashed to two wooden planks, spaced almost too far apart for Ndoto’s narrow wheelbase, so progress was slow. Once she was loaded onto the ferry, Scott and Pontoon Man pulled the raft, hand over hand, across the river and landed at the bank.
With a huge grin on his face, Scott drove Ndoto off the raft and onto a line of skinny logs that were laid over the sand like a carpet. The clickety-clack sound of the tires moving over the logs could probably have been heard kilometers away.
“How was it waiting over here alone? How did you feel?” Scott asked as I climbed into Ndoto.
“Thrilled. Impatient. A little scared. But it was worth it.”
We waved goodbye to Pontoon Man and began climbing out of the valley and through North Luangwa Park. All at once, we were burdened by more than just stifling heat. For three solid hours, we were attacked by tsetse flies. We didn’t see or pass a single vehicle until we were at the park exit, so all tsetse fly eyes—and that’s a lot of eyes—were on us.
Fortunately, the owners of Zikomo had given us a spray bottle filled with Dettol, a disinfectant that looked and smelled like Lysol, as a parting gift. “If you are driving from the pontoon landing through North Luangwa, you are going to need this,” Victoria said. “Tsetse flies hate it. Spray it on your body, and they won’t bite you.”
The Dettol worked, but we had to practically dowse our bodies, and Ndoto, with the smelly white liquid to keep the flies from biting. Not only is a tsetse bite extremely painful, it can cause a disease called trypanosomiasis (or sleeping sickness), a serious condition that starts with a fever and progresses to tremors and sometimes paralysis. It’s nasty. And the flies are almost impossible to kill. Swatting them doesn’t do it. Whacking them as hard as you can with a rolled-up newspaper barely irks them. To kill tsetse flies, you must crush their bodies by stomping on them, or pinching them in half. They are diabolical.
I detest tsetse flies. I nearly go mad swatting at them. Game viewing is impossible. We both are on the lookout for flies instead. We beat one another other up badly too. We are either swatting the flies on our own bodies or slapping each other.
“Sorry,” I said giving Scott’s leg, then shoulder a sharp whack.
“No, it’s okay,” he said. “Get ‘em!”
It was still so hot that I was down to a thin camisole and a sarong that I had hitched up around my waist. By the time we reached the north exit of the park, my hair and clothes were soaked in dust, sweat, and Dettol. I looked and smelled disgusting. I had the beginning of welts and bruises all over my body, and I had the crazed look of someone who had just come out of battle.
All that Dettol left me sticky and stinky. I was desperate for a shower. We drove as fast as we could, which was our max speed of eighty kilometers per hour, to Kapishya Hot Springs, an oasis in the highlands. Kapisha is located one thousand feet above the Luangwa Valley. The air is crisp and cool. I could finally breathe easily again.
The Kapisha property includes a lodge, a campsite, a garden, hiking trails, and a crystal-clear hot springs pool. Birdsong was melodious and abundant. We even had sightings of the turaco, an amazing-looking bird whose colorful feathers were favored by Swazi royalty, and whose crest resembles a Moroccan fez. It’s related to another of my favorites, the go-away-bird, so named because its call sounds exactly like a whiner saying, “go away.” With all the perks Kapisha had, we were surprised that we had the place to ourselves.
Over the next few days, we leapfrogged from camp to camp in pleasant weather, eventually coming to Multinando, a birding paradise run by a white couple born in Africa, the man from Kenya and the woman from Zambia. They had created a special haven amongst gigantic hills of granite.
Multinando’s chalets were built right into the hillside. Each little cottage had panoramic views of rolling granite domes, dotted with hundreds of species of trees and bushes. Horse trails and walking paths followed the river or climbed up and over the hills.
We situated Ndoto atop an expansive granite plateau, where we had a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree view of the surrounding countryside. It wasn’t an official campsite. Scott thought the spot was the most picturesque, so, after asking permission, he parked there.
While on a hike around the property, we came across a canoe and two oars on the bank of a narrow river. Like Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer, we climbed in and paddled upstream to see what we could see.
“It just keeps getting better,” I said to Scott as we followed kingfishers that hovered and dived into the river on the hunt for a meal. “This place is so out in the boonies, the back of beyond, as Aussies say.” I thought about how difficult it was to get there and how long it took.
“Even though she’s slow, we never would have been able to come here but for Ndoto. I’m happier than ever we took the plunge and bought her sight unseen.”
Scott smiled in agreement, content that I was content, and happy that I loved adventure and spontaneity as much as he did.
That night, we had dinner with the owners, Mike and Lari. Like many lodge owners we met who were getting up in age, Mike and Lari were seeking a buyer for Multinando, so that they could retire to England. But it was next to impossible to find anyone who would buy a one-off lodge deep in the bush, no matter how glorious the setting. Mike and Lari had dedicated their lives to their business, and it showed. But even if they did find someone to take it over, they might not end up with enough cash from the sale to retire. In a sense, they were stuck in paradise.
“When we started Multinando, we had so many aspirations for the place, most of which we achieved,” Mike said. “Unfortunately, we just never thought of an exit strategy. When you are young and living your dream, who thinks about getting old?”
NDOTO SEIZED
We were on the Great North Road, well on our way to Tanzania, when we received word that Scott’s mom had entered hospice care.
We turned around and drove back to Lusaka, the capital of Zambia. We talked about finding a place to store Ndoto, and that we might have to miss Karl and Mandy’s wedding in South Africa.
In Lusaka, Paul Barnes eased our storage worries when he offered to keep Ndoto at his Pioneer Camp while we were in California. It seemed our exit from Africa would be fairly straightforward. Except for one thing: Each time we crossed a border in Africa, Ndoto was issued a Temporary Import Permit (T.I.P.). The T.I.P. for Zambia would expire in three days.
We looked up the penalties for overstaying a T.I.P. in Zambia. It was one-hundred-and-fifty dollars per day, not a figure that made us comfortable asking for forgiveness, rather than permission. We needed to visit the Zambian Customs Office in Lusaka and plead for an extension.
We spent an hour in the tedious ooze that is Lusaka traffic. It is a slow orbit where you can buy a thigh master, a bag of onions, or a circular saw from vendors who weave their way on foot between a crush of vehicles. Finally, we were on the second floor, room five of the Zambia Port Customs Office, seated across from Mr. Dennis Mwikisi.
Dennis was tired. Or he seemed tired. He slumped, half draped over his desk. He could barely keep his eyes open as we told our story. His mumbled words came from beneath his right hand, which he ran over his face and head periodically as if he were trying to wipe our tale of woe from his memory. His other arm looked tired too, as it was working hard to hold up his head.
“Not possible,” Dennis said into his hand after we requested an extension.
We politely implored. Several times during our discussion we had to interject, “Sorry, but would you repeat that please?”
Dennis, eager to be rid of us so he could rest, granted a thirty-day extension with the proviso that our vehicle be stored in the seized vehicles lot, not at Pioneer Camp.
“Is there any way we can get a longer extension?” Scott asked pressing forward. “And wouldn’t it be possible to leave our vehicle at Pioneer Camp?”
“No,” Dennis said with a gasp.
I began to worry that Dennis would expire before our T.I.P. Poor man. He probably had malaria. His head was almost flat on his desk. Then, from the depths of his responsibilities as a bureaucrat, he suddenly gathered enough strength and said, “Go to the head office on Cairo Road and ask for Mr. Christopher Mwango. Perhaps he can help you.”
So, off we went to Cairo Road, the heartbeat of Lusaka.
Mr. Christopher Mwango was not anywhere near as lethargic as Dennis. Christopher was happily busy at his desk, sitting upright and beaming as broadly as the man in the photo above him—Mr. Michael Sata, the President of Zambia. Nothing held Christopher’s head up but his neck.
“Fine, fine. Yes, how can I help you?” he said brightly after we introduced ourselves and asked after his health. We explained our situation.
“I’m sorry to hear your news, but extensions past thirty days are not possible,” he said. “You might see Mr. Dennis Mwikisi at the Port Office and inquire with him.”
“We have been to see Mr. Mwikisi, and he suggested we see you. The thing is, my mother’s condition is indefinite, so it would be helpful if we had an extension longer than thirty days.” It was like watching a tennis match. Scott lobbed and Christopher Mwango returned, until Mr. Mwango finally agreed that an extra week might be possible.
“But you must return to Mr. Mwikisi who will arrange the necessary paperwork. I will phone him now and tell him you are coming. You’ll be charged a storage fee of eighteen Kwacha (three dollars) per day until you return to Zambia and pick up your vehicle.” He rose and extended his hand indicating the match was over. “In any event,” he said merrily, “technically speaking, three days from now, when your T.I.P. expires, we will impound your vehicle.”
We thanked Mr. Mwango for his time and alertness.
As I walked out of the office I stopped in the doorway, and, as an afterthought, turned to Christopher and asked, “What happens if we aren’t back in the allotted time?”
“Then,” he said gravely, “you must try to buy your vehicle back at public auction.”
“Hurry,” I said to Scott as we drove back towards Mr. Mwikisi’s office. “By the time we get there, Dennis could be on life support.”
We stopped at an Internet café and quickly composed a “letter of understanding” detailing our discussion with Mr. Mwango.
“It’s probably only worth the paper it’s written on, but it can’t hurt and it might help,” Scott said as he printed a second copy.
Back at Dennis’s office, we were cheered to see that he was awake, if not more erect. Scott presented the extension agreement we had prepared. Dennis, elbows splayed out on the desk and holding the document in both hands, not only read the agreement word by word, he corrected the spelling of his last name. Then he did something you long to see a government official do when you were requesting the impossible: He stamped it. He stamped the copy too and handed it back to Scott.
“All rrrrright,” he said, eyes once again at half-mast. “Bring your vehicle tomorrow, and I will show you where you can pock (park) it.”
We drove back to Pioneer Camp without speaking.
As we neared the gate, Scott turned to me and said, “Well, what’s the worst that can happen?” Then we talked about all the bad things that could happen. The car could be stripped. It could be stolen. If we overstayed our extension, we would have to buy our own car back at auction, if we were so lucky. What would that cost? We surrendered to the unknown.
“It is what it is,” Scott said. “We really have no choice.”
The next morning, as Scott drove away, I said a tearful farewell to Ndoto and everything inside her, all we owned in Africa: tools, bedding, a library of books, pots and pans, car parts, shoes, and clothes. Scott told me later that at the customs lot, he situated her next to a seized Range Rover, which for some reason, made me feel better—as if her younger yet more successful brother would watch over her while we were away. The next day, we flew to George, South Africa not knowing how long we would be gone and wondering if we would ever see Ndoto again.
CIRCLE OF LIFE
We flew to America with a two-day layover in George, South Africa. The timing of our return home jived strangely and perfectly with Karl and Mandy’s wedding date in Knysna.
The ceremony was conducted onboard a boat in Knysna lagoon, with the vows exchanged before a stunning backdrop of sunset on the headlands. We were happy that we were able to be there to see these two gracious and generous people, who fell in love while overlanding and who helped make our dream a reality, become man and wife.
Then home.
Our time in California was both tough and nurturing. We stayed in our niece’s backyard cottage, which sat amongst fruit trees and hummingbirds. During our stay, she made homemade bread just for us. Not bread machine bread. It was real, fed from sourdough starter, kneaded every thirty minutes, made with love, topped with Irish Butter and good for coping, bread. Some days, at twilight we had a gin and tonic or two on her patio and talked about Africa.
We also received support and much appreciated distraction from friends and family. They understood why we were there and made no demands on us. They opened their hearts and homes and listened to stories of Africa and of loss, until it was time for us to go. It felt strange to be home, yet not really back.
Most every day, Scott made the twenty-mile drive to sit by his mother’s bedside. Sometimes he’d read to her—letters she’d written from her beloved Mexico, where she lived for ten years, or passages from a favorite book—until one of his tireless and doting siblings replaced him.
Then, one day, as is no doubt true for mothers the world over, Scott’s mom, with all her children around her, rallied. She ate a little and smiled when told she was loved. She still didn’t know us, but she was aware that there were people around her who cared for her.
“Your mother is a strong woman,” the nurse said to Scott. “She may go on like this for quite some time.” As the days then weeks went on, Jane’s condition was so unchanged, that after almost four weeks of vigil, Scott’s brother went home to Texas, and Scott booked return flights to Africa. We said our final goodbyes and made our way back to Lusaka on four flights.
We missed our last connection, the one that was supposed to get us to the Zambian Customs Office at noon. Instead, we arrived at the Lusaka airport three hours late. We were sure that everyone would have “knocked off” by the time we got to the customs lot. Plus, it was Friday afternoon and rush hour had begun. Scott was agitated and frustrated.
As much as we wanted to tell our taxi driver to make haste so we could get to Ndoto as fast as possible, that was the last thing you want to tell a taxi driver in Africa. So, we just said, “It would be nice to arrive at the Customs Office before it closes.”
Scott sat in the front seat beside Abel, a calm middle-aged man. Abel exuded the exact opposite of Scott’s current mood. Shoulders balanced, breathing steady, and smile matching his eyes, Abel seemed relaxed, like a man who had never had a vehicle impounded. Or, perhaps he was imagining the Friday night ahead of him.
Scott stared at the bumper-to-bumper traffic, his shoulders rising with each slow kilometer. I sat in the back seat looking out the window. I commented on how beautifully green Zambia had become since we’d left.
“Yes, the rains have arrived,” said Abel. He glanced over at Scott. “Don’t worry.” “Office workers don’t knock off until 5:00 p.m., even on a Friday.”
Scott groaned, doubting that we would make it, but Abel was able. He got us to the Customs Office parking lot with minutes to spare. We looked anxiously into the lot where all the seized vehicles were parked. I felt like Scarlet peering desperately into the mist for a glimpse of Tara. Then I saw her. Ndoto was still there!
Abel parked under a tree and helped me carry our bags to the Landy, while Scott went inside with the stamped copy of our letter of understanding, clasped tightly in his hand. I peeked in Ndoto’s windows and saw that everything was exactly as we had left it. Even the GPS charger sat waiting on the front seat. I had a set of keys with me, so I opened the rear door and investigated further.
Items we stored in the secret place were there. Even the items in the super-secret place were there. I took out one of our camp chairs and sat in the shade of an impounded semi truck and waited for Scott.
Ten minutes later, Scott had still not appeared, so I walked around the lot, exploring how we could exit. In front of Ndoto was a shallow, dry moat. No kidding. A moat. And behind Ndoto, a Toyota Corolla was parked almost directly across her stern. I looked for something to span the moat, something strong enough to drive a Land Rover across. There were some huge pieces of concrete lying about, but there was no way we could have moved them. Feeling useless, I found my bottle of window cleaner and started washing the windows. I had just moved on to buffing the headlights, when Scott came across the lawn with a stack of stamp-laden paperwork and the keys.
“Hooray!” I said. “You were gone so long I was starting to get worried.”
“I had to go to several offices. Each time I was directed to another office, I was told, ‘but they might have knocked off by now.’ Fortunately, everyone was still there. And they all remembered us. They said, ‘Oh yes. The family emergency Land Rover.’”
“Aw, that’s sweet. But there’s one little problem,” I said pointing to the moat and the Corolla blocking our escape.
“Arrgh!” Scott clutched his head with both hands. As I had done, he briefly looked for something to span the moat. “I’ll ask them to move the Toyota,” he said hesitantly.
Going back into the impound office felt risky. We had the keys. We had the stamps. We were in the clear. If Scott went back inside, someone might think of a reason Ndoto had to remain seized or say, “Come back on Monday.” Delays in Africa rarely worked to anyone’s favor.
Scott soon reappeared, followed by Alfred, a customs official who had come to examine the problem.
“The man with the keys to the impounded vehicles has knocked off,” Alfred said.
Another man came out to see our trapped vehicle. The three men studied the gap between the Corolla and the backend of the dark-blue semi truck in silence, as if working out a puzzle.
“It’s not possible to move this blue truck. Keys do not exist for this truck,” Alfred said. He moved to the Corolla and spread his arms to measure the gap. He stood back and rubbed his chin.
After a time (God, the man had patience), Scott said, “You know, if we had enough guys, we might be able to bounce the Corolla over a few feet. We used to do that all the time at my fraternity when cars got blocked in.”
“If you do that, I’ll video it,” I said.
For some reason, my offer caused Alfred’s eyes to light up. There followed a lot of measuring, arm waving, and casual weight testing of the Toyota.
Then Scott, beaming with the satisfaction of a man who had come up with a brilliant idea, began wind milling his arms like a preacher trying to incite fervor amongst his flock and said again with more gusto, “If we can get more guys, I think we can bounce this car out of the way.”
Alfred left to find more muscle.
Soon, there were five more men, pedestrians who had been on their way to the bus station next door. They gathered around the Corolla. All the men stood ready. The first attempt fell flat since the Corolla had one—a flat.
“Okay, so we must peeek it up and move it,” Alfred said, in charge now. “One, two, thrrree” and they all heaved at once. “Again,” said Alfred. The female security guard left her post and came to help. “Again. Once more.” Then the tape measure came out for all to see that there was just enough space now for Ndoto to get through.
I got behind the wheel while the men, hands spinning chest level as if they were at the helm of a sailboat in a storm, directed my steering.
“Madam, now turn your wheel all the way. Turn it. Turn it. Now, straight, straight, strrrraight.”
“Zikomo. Thank you,” I said when I was finally through the narrows, nearly shy one side mirror.
Scott wanted to show his gratitude to the men. “I really can’t thank you all enough,” he said. “May I give you some money for your help?” But when he held out a large denomination kwacha note, no one rushed to take it.
Were they hesitant because they would have difficulty breaking the bill and dividing it fairly? Had they thought they would be in trouble with Alfred for accepting the money? Alfred took a few steps back and threw his hands in the air. He didn’t want part of anything that might look like we had been greasing the Customs Department wheels.
Finally, another man reached out with a smile and accepted the cash. They all moved away as one body, strangers joined together by a Toyota Corolla and the equivalent of twenty U.S. dollars.
BAT MIGRATION
For most of the year, The Kasanka Trust in Zambia is known for its camera shy lechwe, a medium-sized aquatic antelope and for the shoebill, a large, funny-looking gray bird that sports a cowlick atop its head and a beak that resembles a Dutch clog. But in November and December, Kasanka is home to something even more incredible, the largest mammal migration in the world. Not wildebeests and zebras. Bats.
At the start of the rainy season in neighboring Congo, eight million bats take flight, all at once, and fly across the border to descend on Kasanka where they devour a cornucopia of ripe fruits and berries. By day, they roost shoulder to shoulder in the trees, the limbs sometimes becoming so heavy with bats that they break off and fall to the ground, bats and all. At sunset each day, the skies suddenly turn black as the bats leave their roost en masse to search for food. This was something we didn’t want to miss.
Just before sunset, a guide picked us up at our campsite and drove us to one of the bat viewing areas. We climbed a handmade, steeply pitched thirty-foot-tall ladder to a small rickety platform that barely had room enough for the three of us. We could see almost all of Kasanka over the treetops. Bringing our focus closer, we realized that all the clogged clumps draped from the tree limbs were not vegetation, but millions of bats. It was almost too much to fathom.
When the sun dropped below the horizon, every bat let go of its upside-down grip and took flight. The sky overhead became dark and foreboding, until it resembled Van Gogh’s Starry Night, but with swirling skies of bats, instead of blue storm clouds.
I’d been speechless a few times before in a wildlife setting. It happened the time I was sitting in the back seat of an open top game viewer in Zimbabwe, and a young male elephant walked over and casually rested his trunk over my shoulder and onto my thumping chest. For a few moments, the tip of his trunk delicately sniffed my being.
It was almost the same for the bat spectacle at Kasanka, though I didn’t weep with joy when I viewed the bats. I was in awe. You can’t experience it without being impressed and bedazzled by nature.
The following morning, a group of five Peace Corp kids were at the park exit trying to get a lift. We gave free rides to young Americans like them whenever we could because Peace Corp pays their volunteers more in experience than in dollars. We knew that they had probably already spent what little money they had on beer, cigarettes, and Doritos and couldn’t afford to pay for transport. That didn’t matter. They needed to get to the town of Samfya, and so did we. Besides, Peace Corp volunteers always have the best tips and latest in-country information, so we planned to pick their brains during the drive.
We had room enough for two, so Ben and Jenny quickly jumped in. Tucking their backpacks around them, they made themselves a little nest on Ndoto’s back perch. Scott had to stop twice on the way just so they could climb out and get some blood flowing back into their legs.
We set up camp where they did that night, a place not in any guidebook or GPS but down the road from a missionary family known to the Peace Corps kids. It was situated on the shore of Lake Bangweulu, in Northwest Zambia, “where the water meets the sky.” It had Wi-Fi and a well-stocked bar, which came in handy because it was here that we received an email from home that Scott’s mom, hopefully comforted and gratified that all her children had come to say goodbye, had passed away.
We excused ourselves from Ben and Jenny, telling them that we had received some sad news from home. We sat under a tree on the beach talking about Scott’s mom, her illnesses, and her death. I wondered aloud if she had lived her dreams. We decided that she probably did when she lived on the beach in Mexico for ten years, something she had talked about for years before taking the plunge.
We had conflicting emotions. Appreciation that we were living the life we chose, but also grief that we were suddenly down yet another family member. I wondered if those feelings weren’t conflicting ones at all.
We’d known loss. Who didn’t? But for a time, we were steamrolled by it. My dad passed away while in the hospital for minor surgery. On the day Mom entered hospice, my eldest brother was given six months to live. Then, we lost a beloved sister-in-law, a hub in our family. Three of our friends died before reaching their fiftieth birthdays. Scott’s parents were both gone now too. And it wasn’t like we were going to stop losing loved ones. Death and loss are part of life.
This was exactly why we live our lives with such urgency, why we bought Ndoto and set out for Africa. We got it. Life really is short.
As we lay there on the sand, melancholy was overcome by gratitude. Up until she got sick and was robbed of memories by dementia, Scott’s mom had lived her dreams. Scott and I wanted to live ours too.
We looked up to see a barmaid walking towards us carrying two large bottles of beer.
“From them,” she said pointing to the bar where Ben and Jenny sat. They raised their glasses and flashed us sympathetic smiles.
Thank you, I mouthed to Jenny. I smiled up at the barmaid and asked her name. She used a church key to pry open the beers, and, as she threw the caps into the lake, she answered, “Purity.”
LIFE’S TOO SHORT TO EAT HUNGARIANS
Mumbuluma Falls was the first of three impressive waterfalls we would visit in Zambia. We’d be driving another rough, debilitating road to get there, so we hoped the rumored new campsite would be up and running.
It took all day to get there. We arrived hot, tired, and clammy to find that there was indeed a brand-new covered palapa at the site but not much else. We called out and sat in the shade to wait (Africa teaches nothing if not patience), but nobody came.
“Let’s at least cool off in the water,” Scott said. We walked to the falls in our swimsuits and refreshed ourselves in the sparkling pool below.
Children appeared. Hands on knees, they leaned over the embankment high above us and stared. We waved and threw them some come-join-us-gestures, but they stayed put. Eventually, they sat on their haunches and laughed at the two mzungus in the cold water. This brought more children until there was a row of twenty, watching us swim as if they were waiting for something to happen.
“We must be near a village,” Scott said.
None of the children ventured into the water, making me wonder if there was something dangerous lurking below the surface.
“Yeah. But the way they’re looking down on us so expectantly, I feel like we’re entertainers in a gladiator arena.” I dunked one more time and got out.
By the time we returned to the campsite, there was a man standing next to Ndoto. He looked pale, thin, and sweaty. It turned out he was malaria stricken. He welcomed us saying, “We have never had an incident of violence here.” He repeated this three times, and then he took two cell phones from his pocket.
“I am from the village. I want to tell the man who is in charge that you are here.”
Lots of Africans have two cell phones, each with a different service provider, to increase their chances of connecting to a working network. He punched a number into one phone. No luck. He tried the other phone, which, to his enormous relief, worked.
“Please come,” he said into the phone. “There is tourism here.”
The man never came, so we gave the camping fee to the villager.
“Perhaps you could use it to see a doctor for some malaria tablets,” I said.
Two days later, we sat at the top of the spectacular Lumangwe Falls. The fast-flowing river that fed the falls plunged over the edge in a series of grand steps before taking one final giant leap to the base. The campsite was so close to the falls, I could feel the roar in my chest and the mist on my skin.
“An official campsite at the top of a powerful waterfall like this would never be allowed in America,” Scott said. “Here, there’s just a small handwritten sign that says ‘no swimming.’”
Though our dinner setting that night was one of the most picturesque of the trip, the menu was the worst by far. Since leaving South Africa, we had tried to duplicate the delicious sausage braais of our friends. We hoped that the Hungarian sausages we’d purchased in Samfya might scratch that itch. We eagerly opened the package. Inside were two sausages, each a foot long and covered in an off-putting bright-pink casing.
“They don’t look too appetizing,” I said to Scott. “Maybe barbequing them will improve things.” We made coals and placed the Hungarians on the grill. As they cooked, the meat inside grew, but the casing just got tighter and tighter. We stood back and watched in horrible fascination for the explosion that was sure to come. But the casing acted like a pair of Spanx worn to a high school reunion. No matter how big and bloated the Hungarians grew, the pink casing held the sausage filling in tight. I wanted to reach over and puncture one with a needle, but I was afraid I’d put my eye out. In the end, watching them grow was entertaining, but the Hungarians were completely inedible.
As we dug into our emergency supply of pasta, a couple named Mrad and Inge from South Africa pulled in and camped near us. Painted on the side of their Toyota Land Cruiser was, “Adventure before Dementia,” which rang all too true.
Scott looked over at me. “Life is too short to eat Hungarians.”
Later, over cups of hot tea around the campfire, Inge shared with me her trick for emptying her bladder without having to climb down the ladder in the middle of the night. “I just use an empty Coke,” she said proudly.
“Oh. Uh...,” I didn’t know what to say. She was so enthusiastic about her method that I said, “That’s a really good idea. I’ve been risking my life for several months now by climbing down the ladder in the middle of the night, even in Big Five areas. I never thought of going in an empty Coke.”
In bed later I shared with Scott. “Inge told me she pees in a Coke bottle in their tent at night. But, how is that possible? Maybe she uses a funnel. That’s got to take some skillful aim. And how does she keep it from spilling?” I fell asleep trying to work out the physics of it all. Still, I put it on my mental list: buy a Coke. And a cork.
It was still on my mind in the morning, so I walked over to where Inge and Mrad were having coffee.
“Um, Inge? Can I ask you something? How do you do it exactly? I mean with the Coke bottle.”
“Not a Coke bottle,” she said, laughing. “I use an old Coke bottle. You know, the ones with the big square-ish lids?” I knew she was trying to clarify what exactly she peed in, but with Inge’s accent, it still sounded like Coke.
She stared at the perplexed look on my face.
I really wanted to get this and stop risking my life for a pee. “You know,” she said, “a Coke powder container with the screw-on lid.”
“Ohhh. You mean a hot chocolate container. CO-CO.”
“Yes,” Inge said with a sigh. “That’s what I said. Coke.”
“You’ll never know how glad I am that I asked for clarification.”
“We both are,” said Scott
I later found something much better to use when nature called at night. So, if you see a blue plastic pitcher hanging from a spar outside our tent by the ladder, it isn’t sun tea I’m brewing.
LONG LIVE PRINCE VALIANT
Ndole Bay Lodge on Lake Tanganyika was not a place you stay only one night. It’s another one of those African overland destinations that takes twelve hours of organ rearranging roads to get to—at least it does if you are driving a forty-year-old Land Rover. It’s only when you finally arrive to the expansive beach at the south end of Lake Tanganyika that it becomes worth the effort. Unless you ask your husband to trim your hair.
I trim Scott’s short blond hair regularly when we are on the road. But somewhere along the way we had misplaced our blunt-tipped kiddie scissors, so for a couple of months I had been using the tiny two-inch-long scissors on our Swiss Army Knife to cut his hair.
“Hey, how about trimming my hair for once?” I said one morning after breakfast. My below the shoulder, dark-blonde hair was looking just the way I liked lately, but the split ends needed attention. Using my thumb and index finger, I showed Scott exactly how much I wanted cut off. “Only a half inch,” I said. “Just enough to trim the dry ends. Okay?”
“Okay,” he said.
I positioned a camp chair on the sand, so I would have a view of the shimmering lake. Scott stood behind me and began delicately and meticulously snipping. He was so gentle I could barely feel him cutting. I was enjoying the pampering. Soon I closed my eyes and gave in to the moment. Time passed.
“Okay, I think I’m done.”
“Thanks, babe,” I said. I opened my eyes and choked on my gratitude. Instead of a sprinkling of hair ends, there were enough clumps of six-inch-long hair lying at Scott’s feet to build a Bearded Collie.
“Look what you’ve done. How could you do this?” I said in disbelief.
Scott stared at the mound of hair as if he was seeing it after waking from a coma. He put his hand up to his face and rubbed his chin the way he did sometimes when he was trying to look professorial, or know-it-all-y.
“Well,” and just the way he said it I could tell he had called in the punt team and was going on the defensive. “You said cut it, so I cut it. What are you so upset about? It’ll grow back.”
“Moron!” I said.
I did my best to stomp off to the restroom in the thick sand. The little building contained two showers, two sinks, two toilets, and one six-inch-square mirror on the wall. In the mirror, I saw Prince Valiant staring back at me. I wet my hair, but then I just looked like Prince Valiant after a swim.
“Moron,” I said into the mirror.
I expressed this same sentiment every time I looked in a mirror for the next five weeks. I knew this is a terrible thing to say out loud about one’s spouse and anyone who knows Scott knows he is anything but a moron. He is intelligent, well read, witty, handsome, and yes, absent-minded. But he is a hair-cutting moron.
THE RAINY SEASON, RED LAGOON ROADS OF ZAMBIA
With my insanely poofy pageboy hair contained in a baseball cap, we left Ndole Bay. We felt ready to take on the long drive to Kasama on one of the worst roads in Zambia. But Ndoto wasn’t ready. During a pre-drive check (just like a pre-flight check only with more bending and peering and humming) we discovered a broken leaf spring.
Leaf springs are curved pieces of thick metal, nestled together in a big arc under the car to provide suspension and comfort. When they broke, the “comfort” part of the equation was eliminated. To paraphrase Bette Davis, we were in for a bumpy ride.
Two hours later, after constant weaving and tossing and lurching in and out of massive potholes, my organs were rearranged and we hadn’t gone very far.
“We’ve only done twenty kilometers,” I said loudly, looking at the GPS.
“Why are you shouting?”
“So that you can hear me. It’s so noisy. WHAT’S THAT NOISE?”
Scott slowed to a stop with the motor running. We could hear it clearly now. There was a swarming mass of cicadas all around us. Only, it wasn’t cicadas. It was Ndoto.
In the past when Ndoto made funny noises like pinging, or grinding, or ticking we gave each other the, let’s-give-it-a-moment-and-see-if-it-stops look. Usually the sound disappeared without us ever knowing what had caused it.
But this time, the buzzing was accompanied by extreme heat coming from below the gear stick—so extreme that when we stopped Ndoto at the top of a rise, I reached for the fire extinguisher. We took a moment to look around, practicing “Situational Awareness” as we were taught.
We were between sparsely populated villages, and we hadn’t seen anything on the road other than lagoon-size potholes. We shut off the engine and began to search for the source of the noise and heat. I looked through the three Land Rover manuals we had on board, while Scott crawled under Ndoto. The closest thing to cicada noise I could find in one of the manuals was “loud whirring.”
“It might be the gear box,” I said. “Maybe we’re low on fluid.”
“Oh no,” Scott said from beneath the car. “We lost the plug—the bolt that keeps the gear fluid from running out. It must have been ejected on that really bad pothole back there.”
“Which pothole? The first one, or one of the 193 after that?”
We searched through our collection of jiggled-off nuts, bolts, and screws in the toolbox to find a close match. No luck. We looked for a bolt we could use from elsewhere on the vehicle. The bolts connecting the bumper were too small. The high-lift-jack bolt was almost the right size, but when Scott tried it, the threads wouldn’t catch.
While we were bolt hunting, two young men came walking down the road and stopped near Ndoto, at the rim of a kiddie pool-sized pothole. Whatever the problem, they wanted to help. At first, they got under the car with Scott and watched what he did. With their legs stretched out in a row, it looked as if Ndoto was devouring three perfectly good men. After a while, the two men joined me topside to help look for a bolt to poach from somewhere else on the car. They didn’t speak much English, but listened intently when Scott asked me for various tools. Soon, one of the men named Dennis began requesting a vice grip, spanner, and wrench as if he was a medic demanding a scalpel STAT.
Dennis unscrewed one of the bolts that secured the bumper.
“Nope. Too small,” Scott said showing him again the size we needed.
Meanwhile, three more hoe-and-machete-toting men appeared on the road. Dennis quickly covered our toolbox with a small tarp and communicated with “no-no” gestures and a low voice that it wouldn’t be a good idea for these men to see our valuables. But the men stopped and weren’t in any hurry to leave, so before long, Dennis’s desire to find a bolt won out over his concerns. The tools came out and the bolt from the high-lift jack was removed again.
I remarked to one of the recent arrivals that I liked his unbelievably shiny lilac-colored shoes topped with a silver orb and a cross buckle. Immediately, they looked at my shoes, an old pair of Tevas. I could tell they were discussing the merits of owning such a pair of shoes. Then one of them seemed to say, “Eish. But her feet are too big,” because they all laughed and either went back to watching Scott or unscrewing bolts on the car.
Scott found a likely replacement at the bottom of his toolbox, but it was too thick and far too long, so he took out the saw and began cutting through the metal by hand. Only a man would think of this. He put a foot on top of the bumper, placed one end of the bolt under his left shoe and sawed. . . and sawed, and sawed. Sweat dripped from his face. His blue T-shirt, damp from sweat and covered with red earth from lying under the car, turned a rusty color.
Then, Dennis took over sawing. After ten minutes, we had a shorter length of threads.
“Everybody, pray,” I said.
The bolt was still too big, so out came the saw again. This time Scott sliced a channel into the top of the screw. “Maybe I can squeeze it in,” he said, hopeful.
But it still wouldn’t fit.
Frustrated and sweaty, he refocused on the bolt off the high-lift jack. To make it fit better, Scott fashioned a short sleeve from a piece of spare rubber tubing, which gave the bolt enough meat to take hold. Meanwhile, I had been looking through the manuals for the location of where we should add the gearbox fluid. Due to Scott’s “Be Prepared Boy Scout Training” we had a full jug of gearbox fluid with us.
“Okay, the fill plug is located at the rear of the transfer box,” I said reading from item 37-2 in the manual.
I dug out the little funnel that we used to fill our water bottles. Taking initiative, Dennis made an extension for the funnel. Using the knife from Scott’s Leatherman tool, he sliced grooves into the rubber hose end and forced it over the funnel stem.
They poured the stinky fluid into the funnel while Scott, under the car again, held the low end of the hose to the gearbox opening. It took ages for two liters of oil to find its way to the gearbox. When the funnel was emptied for the last time, Dennis pulled the hose off the stem. Then, he put his lips to the hose and blew the last dregs of oil down the tube.
“Uh, that stuff is toxic,” I said, while bent over fake puking. “It’ll make you sick.”
Dennis wiped his lips and smiled. Another man, mimicking riding a bicycle, brought me an empty water bottle and asked for some gearbox oil for his chain. He used his shirt to wipe dust from the bottle. All that did was add more dust to the bottle. His shirt, like the shirts of most of the men, had taken on the rusty red dust of Zambian roads.
Two hours had passed.
All the guys appreciated a little money, and a box of Eet Sum Mor Biscuits. But they stood taller when I asked if I could take their photo in front of Ndoto.
Off we went, stopping every five, then ten, then forty kilometers to make sure the MacGyvered bolt was holding.
“I’ve been waiting for the third bad thing to happen today and now it has,” Scott said.
“Three? I can only think of two, the broken spring and the gearbox. What’s the third thing?” I asked.
“That was our last box of Eet Sum Mors.”
The road became even worse. And with the broken leaf spring, we had to slow to a crawl when going in and out of potholes. Our final destination kept changing, as the day grew longer.
At dusk, we made it to the town of Mporokoso, a large, dusty, and out in the middle of nowhere, town. We stopped at the only accommodation listed in our GPS, The Rest House. God, did we need it.
It was Friday night. Eight men sat on the porch of the hotel, drinking beer. Inside was very crowded. There was a rowdy vibe. But beggars can’t be choosy. I watched the men on the porch and some women lingering around them. I began to sense that people didn’t get much rest at The Rest House.
Yep, we had pulled into the “No-Tell Motel.” We had camped on the grounds of a brothel in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia once and I wasn’t excited about a repeat.
A heavily intoxicated man with the most bloodshot eyes I’d ever seen, came to my window. He clung to the window frame for balance. “I would advise you not to stay here tonight,” he said.
“Oh. Really? Why?”
“I am a prefesssor…processser…. I am a teacher, and I have to advise you that it would be better if you don’t stay here tonight. It’s not…safe,” he said coming up with the best word to convince us to leave and making him our second good Samaritan of the day. We drove away knowing that now we would have to camp in the bush.
Driving after dark in Africa was not the best of ideas. It was impossible to predict what type of people or animals would be out at night, and, since night time in Africa is pitch black, there is too much risk of hitting something or someone. It’s almost as risky as canoeing on the Zambezi amongst pods of hippos, or taking a midnight walk in the wild. So, as dusk closed in, we looked for a good spot to pull over—well-hidden and not too close to a village. There was plenty of seclusion because the bush was a thick jungle around us. But the earth was so wet and sticky from the rains that we were sure we’d get bogged as soon as we pulled off the road.
We had a few things in our favor. We hadn’t seen signs of wildlife for some time. The road wasn’t heavily populated with pedestrians. And, in ten hours, we had seen a total of only five other vehicles. The risk of an accident was minimal (we hoped), so we kept driving. The road continued to be a backbreaking chain of potholes, inexplicably interspersed with short sections of smooth new tarmac. Every time we found ourselves on tar road, our sails filled with wind and one of us would say, “If it’s like this, we might as well drive all the way to Kasama.” Then we would suddenly be on a road so deeply potholed, that we became a slow-moving ship, tossed side to side by uneven road.
Then, at ten o’clock on that pitch-black, moonless night, after fifteen hours on the road, the thing we had most feared our entire trip, happened. The road suddenly became a ravine that narrowed to a chasm. The driver side wheels dropped into the abyss, and Ndoto heaved fatally to the right.
“Nooooo! Hang on. We’re going over,” Scott said struggling with the steering wheel as I willed Ndoto to take flight.
I held tight to the window frame and braced my feet against the floor. Just as we could feel the momentum of no return, THUD. We came to an abrupt stop at a thirty-degree angle. Ndoto was up to her neck in a ditch.
We sat in silence. Scott was trapped, his door up against the ditch wall. It was decided that I would climb out to assess the damage. It was like climbing out of a submarine hatch. The tire was stuck in deep. There was no way we were driving forward.
“Try reversing,” I said. But Ndoto wouldn’t start.
Soon, headlights came toward us. I was ashamed to admit that my first thought was wondering if they would help us or hurt us. A van stopped and four well-dressed Zambians came over to the car.
“We’re stuck,” I said stating the obvious.
Scott called out greetings from inside the car and crawled out of my door.
One of the men, Musesha Mayani, suggested we push the car backwards. I climbed in and got behind the steering wheel, but the car wouldn’t budge. We were wedged in tight.
Three women suddenly appeared from the van, and, without speaking, began to collect stones, which they placed under the space where the front wheel should have met the ground. Scott moved to the high-lift jack. One bolt shy from our earlier repair that day, it was easy to detach the jack from the rear of the car. Scott and the other men used the jack to raise the chassis to make room for more stones. The jack was released, but Ndoto still wouldn’t start. She must have been in shock. Five minutes later, we tried again and she roared into action. I put her in reverse and drove backwards. Soon, all four wheels straddled the ravine. I tried to keep the wheels from sliding back down into the abyss. Illuminated by the headlights, Musesha directed my driving.
“Now turn your wheels like this,” he said using his hands. “Turn, turn, turn. Now, go straight back.”
When it felt like Ndoto was going sideways again, I whimpered. Musesha pointed at Scott’s Popeye-arm muscles.
“Now I think he should drive.” I pulled on the emergency brake and Ndoto froze in place.
Once Scott was behind the wheel, we went to plan B, which was to drive forward over the freshly placed stones and climb the bank. I held my breath as Scott revved the engine. He straddled the ravine and then drove over the stones the women had laid and urged Ndoto up the steep bank. “Come on, come on,” he pled, hunched over the steering wheel. For a split second, I thought she might fall over backwards.
I wasn’t sure how she did it, but she scaled the ravine. For all her years, Ndoto was one strong car.
I was spent. I felt a huge sense of relief when Scott drove onto the road. We were okay. Ndoto was okay. I shook everyone’s hands and thanked Musesha for stopping.
“I’m a nurse,” he said, “I had to stop. Your vehicle was at such an impossible angle, I thought surely someone inside would need medical attention.”
Two hours later, around midnight, after seventeen hours on the road, exhaust pipe growling, cracked leaf spring shuddering, gearbox kaput, we were near exhaustion after too many adrenaline spikes in a row. We pulled over and bushcamped just outside Kasama, a one traffic light-sized town.
“Without days like this, it wouldn’t be a true Africa overland adventure,” Scott said with a tired smile as we climbed into our rooftop tent.
As uncomfortable and sometimes scary the day had been, we felt strangely satisfied with the way things had worked out. We had kept our cool. Several times during the day I asked myself what Martha O’Kane would’ve done.
My mother could do anything and fix anything. She could figure out a solution to any problem, and she did it quietly and with grace. She was the embodiment of “Keep Calm and Carry On.” Since she taught me everything I needed to know in life, I feel I should be able to figure things out too, without caving in. A lot more good than bad had come from the experiences. We met nice people. People who helped us and asked nothing in return. It still was a Safari Jema, a good journey.
The next morning, serendipity—always a theme in our travels—struck big. The one auto shop in town was run by Michael, a Zambian who built, owned, and maintained several old Landys just like ours, over the years.
“I can rebuild a gearbox blindfolded,” he said with enthusiasm.
Tools were strewn over two workbenches, and his fingernails were covered in grease. He seemed a confident mechanic, just the kind Ndoto liked, so we took a room at the Kasama Lodge for two nights and made a list of other deferred repairs and maintenance for Michael to tackle over the next few days.
Once the repairs were done, we could continue heading north to Tanzania, then on to Burundi, Rwanda, and Uganda. South Sudan, the newest country in the world, would be our northernmost destination.
YOU ARE ON A GREAT JOURNEY
With new leaf springs in place, Ndoto rode twenty years younger. She moved toward the Tanzanian border at a more comfortable canter as opposed to her usual jarring trot.
In the small town of Mbala, we stopped at a bleak dirt roundabout. Single-story shops with wooden awnings bracketed the roundabout.
“This is an odd place for a roundabout,” I said. “There’s no traffic and hardly any people in this little town.”
“There’s some sort of monument in the middle. Let’s check it out,” Scott said.
We parked and walked up to the plaque in the center of the roundabout, which read “Near this place on November 25, 1918 the German forces in East Africa laid down their arms.”
“I’ve read about this,” Scott said with a twinkle in his eyes. “Most people believe that WWI ended at the eleventh hour of the eleventh day in the eleventh month, but it really ended here two weeks later. Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck continued his march here to Mbala to officially surrender. These were the last of the German troops of the war to surrender. This is where the Great War really ended, not Europe,” Scott said in full-blown nerd mode.
“Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck’s troops and askaris (African soldiers) were fiercely loyal to him. They called him The Lion of Africa. Before his death, he made sure all his askaris received their back pay. He never lost a battle and he despised Hitler. Too bad he wasn’t on the side of the Allies.” Scott talked about von Lettow all the way to Moto Moto, a seldom visited museum located between a prison and a slaughterhouse at the end of a dirt road. Pretty flowers and shade trees decorated a tidy but empty car park.
Moto Moto, which means “smoking fire,” was named in honor of the chain-smoking European priest responsible for most of its collections. The museum might see a total of only a handful of foreigners a year, but it is a treasure. Artifacts included items used in witchcraft and an exhibit of Zambian history including details of a large Polish settlement. An anthropology wing had life-sized dioramas.
In the spotless lady’s loo off the foyer of the museum, there was a small table and a box of two hundred condoms with a sign that read “Free.” There was also a frog trapped in the toilet bowl, unable to climb out on the slippery porcelain. We stared at one another for a few moments.
“One of us has to go,” I said to the frog. I tore off the cardboard lid of the condom box and built a ramp inside the toilet, which the frog used to success. Then, in three long hops, he escaped out the open window and into the garden. I hadn’t yet entered the museum proper, and I was already intrigued. Condoms and frogs weren’t the kind of things you’d see in the lady’s loo at the Louvre.
My favorite exhibit was one that described a bushman greeting. In Bemba tradition the greeting was Umwenene Kwi, which translated, “From what distance did you see me?” The polite response should be, “I saw you from far away.” But if the stranger answered that he couldn’t see him until he was quite close, the bushman would have known that the stranger was mocking his short stature.
While we were touring the museum, it began to rain. Soon there was a flash flood quantity of water falling around Ndoto. If there was one thing I’d learned as an overlander seeking a place to sleep, it was that it never hurt to ask. I had my eye on the spot that Ndoto sat, surrounded by the now drenched pretty flowers in the car park.
I approached Penlop, the young woman minding the curio shop and asked if there was a place nearby where we might camp. Penlop picked up the phone and called Victoria Pheri, the director of the museum, and when she hung up, Penlop said, “You may camp behind the museum tonight.”
We huddled under umbrellas and walked around the museum to have a look. We only hoped for a patch of level ground, but what we found behind the museum was an overlander’s dream campsite. A roomy insaka (thatched shelter) sat next to a brand-new restroom and playground. A gazebo that faced the setting sun was perched at the top of a flight of cement steps. Penlop showed us where we could run our extension cord through an open window and plug in to an outlet inside the museum. We would be able to cook out of the rain while charging our batteries and fridge. But for the pungent stench wafting from the slaughterhouse, it was ideal.
“This is perfect,” Scott said. “Do you get many overlanders camping here?”
“No, you are our first. It’s never been used as a campsite. This is a community center.”
“Well it is lovely, and you are so kind to allow us to stay.”
Another museum employee walked over to admire our Landy.
“Ndoto,” he said quietly as he read Ndoto’s name plate over my door. “I have seen this vehicle on the Internet. You are on a great journey and have come far. And a honey badger attacked this vehicle. This is a very strong car.”
We laughed. It wasn’t the first time photos of our journey had been shared by others on social media sites. Even Africa Geographic had recounted our encounter with the honey badger at Africa on Foot. Now Ndoto, our rock star on wheels, was famous in the little town of Mbala, Zambia.
Victoria Pheri and a little girl came to visit after dinner. They seemed to have a strong and comfortable bond. But even for Africa, Victoria looked a little old to have such a young child. Perhaps she was the grandmother. All was made clear when I asked the little girl’s name.
“Her name is Chiuza. It means.” She struggled to find the correct word “. . . more than a friend,” she said.
“More than a friend?”
Victoria chuckled. “My two other children are fully grown. They are twenty-five and twenty-six-years-old. We were not planning on another child. Then Chiuza, our little friend, showed up.”
“Oh, I see. We call that the “oops” baby.” I smiled. I was a little older than Victoria and only recently had I given up hopes of ever being surprised with an oops baby. “I think you are very fortunate to have your little friend,” I said with a touch of envy.
“Yes,” she said laughing. “It’s nice having a new friend, even at my age.”
Karl and Mandy with Ndoto in the driveway of Jembjo’s Knysna Lodge.
Marius of Marius Electric fixes wires and my hooters.
Karl and Mandy, and guests at Jembjo’s lift the rooftop tent and rack onto Ndoto.
Ndoto ready to hit the road.
Sign on the way to Angie’s G Spot.
Tris walks with elephant back to the sleeping area at Knysna Elephant Park.
Tracking wild animals became a favorite activity.
Mentor Brett Horley guides us to mating lions in Greater Kruger.
Is it baby rhino poo, or baby elephant poo?
Shamwari guide Andrew Kearney explaining spoor while a curious giraffe looks on.
Family encounters matter too. Nephew Brian, and niece Teresa come to South Africa for a visit.
Waiting for Norman to wake up.
The place where Norman slept. He took a bone from the graveyard of another elephant and had a nap.
A honey badger attacks Ndoto at Africa on Foot in Greater Kruger.
Scott earns a light sport pilot license in South Africa
A solo flight over Hoedspruit
Tris overcomes her biggest fear by feeding, patting, and kissing a hippo named Jessica.
A patient genet waits for us to go to bed before investigating the camp site for scraps.
Adding or releasing air to the tires became a regular chore on the roads in Botswana.
The food most missed from home was Mexican. Tris made fajitas whenever wraps could be found.
Bush camped along the Zambezi River.
Ndoto from the back. Clothes, pots, pans, were dry goods kept in bins. Scott made a coffee and gin bar that hung from the back door.
Ndoto’s library, so heavy Ndoto always tilted to the right.
Encounter with an elephant in Kruger Park.
Ndoto in the shadow of a baobab tree in Kruger Park.
This elephant finally let us pass after making us reverse eight times in Mapungubwe National Park.
The only flat tire in over 48,000 kilometers occurred in deep sand in Chobe National Park.
We gave lifts to people, even ones without Pampers like Fuchsia.
Scott set up solar panels to charge the batteries and keep the fridge running in Molema Camp, Botswana.
A rhino left for dead when poachers hacked off her horn. She was lucky to be rescued. Most do not survive.
MOUNTAINS OF MANGOES
The rain stopped sometime during the night and the air was crisp and clear. We couldn’t even smell the abattoir. Such a nice word for such a stinky business.
Scott set his coffee cup down and grabbed another rusk. “Seems like a good day to enter a new country, don’t you think? Tanzania is calling.”
“Sounds good to me,” I said taking the half-eaten rusk from his hand and popping it in my mouth. Packing up, we felt unhurried, relaxed, and happy. Bright, sunny days always made border crossings more palatable. Rain and gloom made me impatient, which was not the best emotion to display when dealing with government officials. We could never predict how long it would take or how much paperwork would be required of us. The experience could exhaust us and take the wind out of our sails. But, if the day was sunny, it didn’t seem to matter as much. Sunshine always made me more capable, more like Martha.
The tiny border post building between Zambia and Tanzania was deserted when we arrived a few hours later, so we parked beside it and waited. The office looked more like a she shed in the middle of a goat pasture than a government building. While we waited, we watched the sunshine and soft breeze dry the tin roof, the fence posts, and the goats. After twenty minutes, a man wearing a suit and tie came running toward the post at full tilt.
“I apologize for not being here when you arrived. I was at church. Here,” he said smiling and reaching for our passports. “I will stamp you out quickly, so you won’t be delayed any longer.”
It wasn’t like we were in a hurry. But it was always a relief to pass through a border post without hassle, so with heavy sighs and glances at wrists without watches, we acted like we had something or someone very important waiting for us in Tanzania.
Sundays are good days to cross at tiny borders, I wrote in my notebook. I tucked away this border-crossing tip as a reminder for another Sunday somewhere in Africa.
A one-minute drive up the road brought us to the Tanzania border. Formalities on the Tanzania side were a more involved process. It was the first time we would use our Carnet, the passport for Ndoto. We had bought the Carnet when we returned to Africa after Ndoto was impounded. No more T.I.P.s for us. It was also the first time our vehicle was searched. Most customs agents wanted to talk about the virtues of old Land Rovers, and this customs agent was no different.
“This car is strong,” he said.
“Well, she’s certainly stronger now,” Scott said, pointing toward Ndoto’s belly and the new leaf spring. The agent performed a cursory search, patted Ndoto’s behind, and said, “Proceed.”
We drove mango-tree-studded roads to Kapili, to Lake Tanganyika Lakeshore Lodge. For many kilometers, children stood on the side of the road with armloads of mangos and strips of mango peel dangling from their mouths. They tried in vain to sell the over ripe fruit to anyone passing. Unattended baskets overflowing with mangos lined the road at twenty-foot intervals. Piles of mangos lay rotting on the ground.
“I guess it’s mango season,” Scott said with a grin.
When we arrived at Lakeshore Lodge, Scott kicked aside fallen fruit to make room for Ndoto under a mango-laden tree at our campsite.
“Well, breakfast is covered. You know, someone should teach them how to dry fruit, don’t you think? Then they could eat it year-round instead of only in December.”
The campsite was slightly upslope from the lodge, so we had a good view of the shimmering lake and a steady breeze to keep us from overheating. One of the best camp bath facilities of our trip was thirty-feet away across a small footbridge. With custom pebble shower floors, pedestal sinks, and enormous cotton bath towels, it had touches of a fine hotel. For overlanders, this place could be called Respite Lodge. We certainly needed the vacation from travel.
The ability to get to lodges like this was another reason why Ndoto made our journey so special. I would never have experienced the remote places that existed along the shores of Lake Tanganyika without Ndoto. With her, we could go where we wanted, when we wanted. Many of the campsites were off the beaten path and sometimes difficult to get to but were well worth the effort. These overlander stops were always ideal places to enjoy a break from rough roads, catch up on routine maintenance—on Ndoto, and ourselves. Ndoto had her nuts and bolts tightened and got a bath. We scrubbed each other’s backs too.
Our days at Lakeshore Lodge were unhurried, unscheduled, and relaxing. Scott went line fishing with a local one morning and caught forty fish in under an hour. He (thankfully) gave all of them to the boatman. We ate mangoes, took walks on the beach, ate more mangoes, and took a sundowner ride in the owner’s motorboat. We didn’t drive anywhere, so Ndoto rested too.
We sat on a beach swing one night and watched the stars with our waiter, Ahmed. I taught him the children’s stargazing poem: Star light, star bright, first star I see tonight, wish I may, wish I might, have the wish I wish tonight. He found me the next morning with pen and paper and asked me to write it down. I wondered what it was he would wish for.
There were other guests staying at the lodge. There was a small team of geologists conducting environmental studies for future oil drilling in the lake. The beds of Lake Tanganyika, and all the rift lakes, were rich in oil reserves, so it was inevitable that oil rigs would soon become part of the Lake Tanganyika waterscape.
“It’s a shame,” the lodge owner, Louise, said gazing out at the clear blue lake. “As long as Africa has resources to be profited from, there will be assets drawn from her belly.”
It wasn’t the first time on the trip that I had a sinking feeling about the future of Africa. My rose-colored glasses had started to dim, and that made me sad. Ndoto was taking us more and more off the beaten track, into an Africa we didn’t see before we had our own vehicle.
Because Ndoto was African (she was built in South Africa), people seemed to treat us too as Africans and not as tourists. No one minced words when speaking to us about politics, or poaching, or the grab for the resources of Africa. I was beginning to wonder if I was seeing and learning too much to stay in love with the continent that had given me so much.
A PUNGENT PILE OF HIPPOS
Tanzanians don’t use the word “rough” when describing their roads. They say, “luff.” Whenever I asked about the condition of the road ahead, they would always answer, “Be prepared for a luff road.”
The road from Lakeshore Lodge to Katavi, a seldom-visited national park that is an all-day drive from anywhere, was luffer than most. The park is one of Tanzania’s gems, set in a true wilderness setting and worth every bump and bruise to get there.
We spent the first night just outside the park at Riverside Camp. A man named Juma managed eight rustic chalets and a large grassy camping area that fronted the Katuma River.
After he showed us where to park Ndoto he said, “Now, come with me,” and led us down to the river at a brisk pace.
In an area about the size of half a football field were four hundred pooing, peeing, and bellowing hippos packed together like sardines. I stopped short when I saw them, but Juma strode right up to the edge of the river. At once, all four hundred hippos were on the move. But it was a short trip, more like a surge. After a few moments, they calmed down, and Juma enticed me to come closer.
The sight before us was heartbreaking and disgusting. Because their skin is sensitive to the sun, hippos laid submerged in water all day and came out only after dusk to feed.
“The rains are late this year,” Juma said, explaining why all the hippos in the area were gathered in this one small patch of water. “It’s only rained enough for the grasses to grow and turn green again but not enough to fill the rivers.” There were so many hippos piled on top of one another, I imagined baby hippos being crushed to death underneath the tonnage.
The hippos were completely covered in the mucky poo-filled water. Tempers flared regularly. Seemingly without provocation, one hippo or another would open his jaws one-hundred-and-eighty degrees to display razor sharp tusks, then grunt and growl and bellow about his wretched life as he waited for rain. It was a miserable existence. My heart went out to the hippos. But I didn’t want to kiss them.
At least they had new shoots of green grass to eat. By 7:30 p.m., almost all the hippos had left the water to feed through the night. They walked directly into camp, right next to Ndoto. I was fascinated by the state of these hippos. What a grim life.
At sunrise, the hippos returned to the pond in the river. They walked right over one another to find a spot where they could stay at least partially submerged for the next twelve hours. Seeing the hippos made us wonder in what condition we would find the animals inside the national park across the road.
The office at the Katavi National Park entrance was a disorganized affair. We signed the park ledger and noticed that we were the first people to sign it in over three weeks. We paid our fees and were told to camp at a place called Ekuu. The ranger handed us a rudimentary map of the park, and we set out on an all-day game drive that would hopefully bring us to Ekuu before dusk.
Not ten minutes after entering the park, we came upon a pack of twenty wild dogs trotting right toward us. Sightings of wild dogs, or painted dogs as they were called, for their multicolored fur, are a rare and wonderful thing to witness. They are gregarious pack animals known for their impressive hunting skills. Eighty-five percent of their hunts result in a kill, the highest rate of all predators. Lions succeed at a kill only 25 percent of the time. Scott switched off the engine, so that we could enjoy the group of twenty dogs in peace.
When the dogs drew near Ndoto, they all settled down in the sandy road in front of the car or next to us, to groom and play. After ten minutes, a game drive vehicle pulled alongside. The guide and guests stayed to enjoy the sighting too until the dogs moved off. We shared aren’t-we-all-lucky smiles with the guide and the couple in the back of the Land Cruiser and continued our drive through the park.
About an hour later, we came upon the same Land Cruiser. The couple and their guide were having refreshments under a shady tree. They motioned us over, so we stopped and got out to chat.
“That is an amazing looking Landy. A real classic. How old is she?” Mark from Vermont said. He and his wife were staying at Palahala, a lodge at the far end of the park. We told them a little about Ndoto and our trip. And their English guide, Matt, told us a little about Palahala. Soon after, Mark, his wife, and Matt were all inviting us to the lodge for dinner that night.
British guides were not all that common in Africa, so I asked, “Matt, how did you come to have a job as a safari guide in Tanzania?”
Matt chuckled. “I often get asked that question. I visited Africa a couple of times as a boy with my family.” He looked over at Ndoto and smiled. “Obviously, you know how it is. Once you visit Africa, well, it gets into your heart and under your skin. Anyway, after university, I went on to play professional football, soccer to you, in the U.K. But I never forgot how being in Africa amongst wild animals in the bush made me feel. I left football for Africa. I did my guide training under a man named Schalk Pretorius at a place called Ulovane in South Africa. After my training, he and his wife found a placement for me here in Tanzania.”
“You’re kidding! We trained at Ulovane too. Such a small world,” Scott said.
Africa is small if you are an expat.
As much as we wanted to see Palahala and enjoy a scrumptious lodge dinner, we declined the invitation. We didn’t think Ndoto could manage the black cotton soil prevalent at that end of the park.
Wet, black cotton soil acts like glue on tires. After it dries, the deep, extra-large pizza size potholes made by elephants that walk over the mud, makes for a jarring and leaf-spring-breaking ride. Black cotton soil was something we tried to avoid.
The sun was getting low in the sky, and we wanted to find Ekuu camp before dark. After getting lost twice, we finally found Ekuu. It consisted of two derelict buildings and not much else. Two men appeared, but when we asked about camping and showed them our receipt they said, “This camp is closed,” without further explanation. We drove away to hunt for a suitable place to camp before nightfall. We still hadn’t seen a single vehicle except for Matt’s, and it felt like we were alone in the park.
We drove for another hour without finding an organized camp or even a good spot to pull over for the night. Then, just as the sun began to set, we spotted an open patch of grass at the edge of a teeny version of the Serengeti Plain. It was the prettiest, most classically “Out of Africa” style wild camp of our entire journey.
“Wow. I think we’ve found our spot for the night,” I said.
While we set up camp, rain clouds gathered optimistically. Maybe there would be relief for the hippos that night. Lilac breasted rollers displayed their turquoise-colored wings, swooping and dipping and rolling before landing in thorn trees overhead. Elephants and antelopes dotted the savannah looking like animals strolling on a fluffy green duvet made for a giant. There was even a mountain shaped like Kilimanjaro on the horizon.
We had this magical place all to ourselves. No one knew we were there. We could probably have camped there for days on end, unnoticed by all but birds and porcupines.
Over dinner we talked about how Ndoto took us to places that had once existed only in our imaginations; that we were experiencing the dream overland journey that started the moment Scott turned his computer screen toward me and said, “Like this one?” nearly two years earlier in our den in California. We agreed that we were doing exactly what we wanted at the exact place we wanted to be.
“Look,” I said pointing to the scene in front of us. “I feel like we’re inside a David Attenborough special.” The clouds that had earlier hinted of rain had vanished, and now the light coming from an almost full moon glowed on the backs of elephants that moved in a single file across the plain. “The longer we are away, the more this feels like home. I just wish the other things that represent home for me were here with us. I miss my family.”
The next morning, even Ndoto didn’t want to leave. We had a hard time starting her. Sometimes I felt we asked too much of our old Land Rover.
But we tested her mettle again, and she held up. She endured eleven hours over luff road to get to Kigoma, the northernmost town in Tanzania on Lake Tanganyika, and the gateway to Burundi.
When we arrived in Kigoma, we had to replace bushings for the second time in seven months. Ndoto ran rough and sluggish, and the engine kept cutting out for no apparent reason. She acted like a mule, repeatedly coming to a stubborn stop, as if reluctant to cross the border into Burundi.
She must have known what was coming.
STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN, ASCENT TO RWANDA
The small landlocked country of Burundi isn’t a bustling tourist destination. Most overlanders transit the entire country in one day to get to Rwanda and points beyond. That was our intention too, and we were granted the usual three-day transit visa at the border. But, Ndoto was in dire need of resurrection and that would require us to be in Burundi longer than three days.
We spent the better part of a day in long lines at the immigration office in the capital city, Bujumbura. First, we had to explain why we needed a visa extension. Then, we waited an hour for “processing.” After that, we waited in another line to pay the required forty-dollar fee. Then, we were directed to the office of the top visa-extending official because he wanted to know why there were tourists who desired to stay in Burundi for more than three days.
“Ah, I understand completely,” he said leaning forward and handing us our passports after we told him we needed to get repairs done on our Land Rover.
One thing I like to notice when visiting a new country, is what people have in their possession as they go about their daily business. Masai carried a stick. Greek men had their worry beads. In Burundi, it seemed most everyone owned a hoe. Every bit of land in this tiny, hilly, and heavily-populated country was under cultivation. The land was divided up amongst such a dense population, that many had to walk long distances to work their small patch of earth.
Clothes were the same dull brown as the earth they tilled. Even school uniforms—skirts for girls and trousers for boys—were earth colored.
Like the Masai with their sticks, Burundians didn’t go anywhere without their hoes. We drove by one outdoor market, where men used one hand to lean on hoes, while the other hand gently and solemnly squeezed goats, from their necks all the way down their spines. I supposed this was to determine the meat or milk producing potential of the goat before buying.
Bushcamping is not allowed in Burundi—there simply isn’t space. We weren’t sure how wise it would be anyway. We saw several trucks filled with AK-47-packing troops or militia. The first hotel we stayed at was empty except for hundreds of military personnel camped on the grounds. The hotel manager told us to set up next to his office for the night “For your safety,” he said.
Burundi and Rwanda share similar culture, history, and ethnic makeup. Most everyone has heard of the 1994 massacre of eight hundred thousand men, women, and children in Rwanda, but few people knew of the twelve-year civil war, or mass killings that had gone on in Burundi. During the first fifty years after independence from Belgium, over five hundred thousand Hutus and one hundred thousand Tutsi were victims of massacre in Burundi.
Now, as we waited for Ndoto to be fixed in Bujumbura, food insecurity, upcoming elections, and continuing ethnic violence made for a tense atmosphere. In the central marketplace, anxious groups of men stood huddled around a single handheld transistor radio, listening to the news. It felt as if an innocuous car backfire could start a melee. We didn’t want to stay in Burundi any longer than necessary.
In the meantime, we couldn’t have picked a better place to spend the nights while Ndoto was being repaired. A man named Adrien and his American wife, ran the Hotel Botanika, an oasis of calm in uneasy Bujumbura. Within minutes of checking in, Adrien had found a mechanic to fix the clutch on Ndoto.
“For your convenience and security, I’ve arranged to have all of the work performed on site, in front of the hotel,” he said making us feel well cared for.
Before long, Désirée the mechanic was getting intimate with Ndoto’s underbelly in the dusty car park in front of the hotel.
“This is not a big problem,” Désirée said after he examined Ndoto. “There’s just some fluid where it shouldn’t be.”
“Isn’t that the definition of a Land Rover?” I said.
Désirée used spare parts we had on hand to rebuild the master and slave cylinders. While working on the clutch, he discovered a crack in Ndoto’s frame, causing Scott to say, “Oh my God,” so we had some welding done too.
While Ndoto was undergoing repairs, we ate French cuisine prepared by Adrien’s chef who, if he wasn’t renowned, should have been. Steak, goat cheese, fresh basil, mozzarella, melon, crusty baguettes, coconut chicken baked in foil, and cappuccino were just a few things on the menu at the restaurant, which was frequented mostly by NGOs, or charity workers.
Each morning, the sous chef walked to the open-air market with two men and an empty wicker basket the size of an old-fashioned steel tub. They came back with a cornucopia of fruits, vegetables, and live chickens. The rest of the food in the pantry was imported from France or made in-house. The Hotel Botanika Restaurant was an incongruent but welcome place in the desperately poor, politically unstable country of Burundi. Though the food was a nice change from our usual fare, we couldn’t fully enjoy it when so many around us were insecure.
Désirée completed his repairs within a few days, and Ndoto seemed ready to make the steep ascent into the seventh country of our journey, Rwanda.
For more than thirty continuously twisting kilometers, the road to Rwanda gained altitude. Traffic consisted of a conga line of trucks, buses, and vans that passed one another on blind curves. In oncoming lanes, boys and young men tore down the hill at breakneck speeds on bicycles laden with charcoal bundles as wide as a car. Those “charcoal boys,” as they were known, took their lives in their hands several times a day to sell bags of charcoal that people used for cooking.
At the base of the mountain pass, the boys latched on to the back of any passing vehicle, usually a truck. Sitting sidesaddle on the bicycle crossbar, they hitched rides all the way to the top. Three boys even grabbed onto the back of Ndoto for a lift.
Once at the top, the boys loaded up on several enormous sacks of charcoal, then raced back down the mountain to find a buyer for their load. The economic and food insecurity in Burundi made risking your life, even for a few pennies, worthwhile. We were surprised we didn’t witness a fatality.
We were halfway through our ascent on the long steep road. I was snapping photos through the back window of four charcoal boys hanging onto Ndoto when suddenly, the clutch gave out completely. There was not a gear to be had. But Scott kept trying—pumping his foot on the pedal like Chuck Berry bouncing down the stage singing “Johnny B. Goode.” Inertia did its best to maintain forward motion, but with the road at an incline, it took only a few seconds before we came to a dead stop. Unfazed, the charcoal boys hanging on to the back, peeled off and coasted downhill until they could grab onto another vehicle.
Guardian angels, or something, seemed to be working overtime on our behalf. Within five minutes a Rwandan man, who worked with the World Food Program, stopped to help.
“Thank you for stopping,” Scott said. “But I’m sure we need a tow. The clutch is gone completely.”
Justin used his cell phone to call for a tow truck and yelled, “Good luck,” out his window as he drove off.
While we waited, we watched the charcoal boys— “Boys on a suicide mission” Scott called them—whiz by. We witnessed countless near misses, as mini buses and trucks passed one another on the blind curve just ahead of where we were broken down. With nowhere to pull over, we waited where we had come to a halt in the right lane, creating yet another dangerous obstacle for drivers and cyclists.
I rested my back against the mountain with my feet in a culvert, until a sudden downpour forced me back into the vehicle. I had to close my eyes against the trucks and bicycles speeding downhill toward us in the opposite lanes while cars and trucks in our lane went around us. I couldn’t stand it, so I got out and stood in the rain.
A tow truck, driven by a tall, handsome Burundian man named Emile, arrived a nerve-racking two hours later. He loaded Ndoto on a flatbed and carried us to Azad’s City Motors in Bujumbura. Emile and his assistant, Bongo, both proclaimed, as nearly every African who had encountered Ndoto did, “This car is strong.” If I had a nickel for every time I’d heard “This Land Rover is strong,” I would have enough money to buy a Toyota Land Cruiser.
I borrowed Emile’s phone to call Adrien. When I explained why we were on our way back to the Hotel Botanika to stay a few more nights, Adrien said, “Oh my God.”
Emile stopped twice on the way down the hill to buy meat from carcasses that hung on racks alongside the road. “Much cheaper than in town,” Emile said in French. Except he said “nyama,” using the Kiswahili word for meat. Bongo rode in Ndoto’s driver seat saying later he did not like riding backwards “pas un peu,” not one bit.
Emile diagnosed the clutch problem as a loose connection between the master and slave cylinder. Maybe something Désirée missed, maybe not. But each time Scott had pressed down on the clutch, fluid had spurted out undetected, until it was all gone.
“Très facile.” An easy fix, Emile said in French. But now that we had seen the road we would have to conquer in our quest to visit Rwanda, we thought it wise that Ndoto undergo a complete safety inspection. When Emile dropped us back at the Botanika, where we had checked out nine hours earlier, we handed him a fix-it list, including a few things I had long wanted repaired such as my windshield wiper and the lock on the passenger side door.
For months now, we had been locking my door with a piece of wire, by running it through the inside door handle (a wide U-bolt) and attaching it to a loop on the metal box under my seat that held the second battery. Each time we arrived at our destination I would get out of the car, and then Scott would have to lean across the seat to secure the wire to lock my door. Not that our car was, or ever would be, Fort Knox, but this was a good thing to finally have fixed. Emile also sourced much needed replacements for the front brake pads.
It would take some days to complete all the repairs, but they weren’t wasted. We spent one of the days exploring Bujumbura’s markets.
Each street seemed to specialize in a specific trade. Our favorite was the textile street. Its shops burst at the seams with colorful bolts of fabric. Outside the shops, dozens of women and men sat at decades-old treadle-operated Singer sewing machines, busily turning yards of fabric into appealing apparel. I could have bought fabric, designed an outfit, and wore it out to dinner that night.
We spent the next morning on the rooftop terrace of the expat frequented Gourmet Café. Over cappuccinos and croissants, we discussed spending Christmas in Kigali, Rwanda, instead of Juba, South Sudan. The way things were going, we didn’t think we could make it to South Sudan in time. Plus, pushing Ndoto when she was so fragile didn’t seem like a good idea.
In addition to the restaurant at the Hotel Botanika, Bujumbura had a surprising number of other wonderful restaurants frequented by NGO and government types. Wherever there is strife or insecurity in the world, there will be people from aid organizations meeting over café au laits. We couldn’t recall seeing a single other tourist while we were in Burundi.
Two days later, we collected Ndoto from Azad. Because of the delays, we decided that Kigali, Rwanda for Christmas, instead of Juba, Sudan would definitely be a better option. We went away almost grateful that we had broken down. I felt better that we had so many items fixed on the car before attempting the ascent to Rwanda.
The tow cost US$70 and all the work plus parts came to less than US$80.
After one more night at the Botanika, we made our second attempt to scale the mountain. Ndoto was running well—better than she had in a long time.
Some of the people in the villages we passed upslope seemed to recognize us from our first attempt. They waved as we passed.
“Bonjour, mzungu,” (Hello, white man) one charcoal boy shouted as he zoomed by. Word got around. Not one charcoal boy grasped onto Ndoto for the ride up.
We were almost to the top, with only five hundred meters to go, when the stick shift suddenly snapped off at the base.
“Nooooo! Not again,” Scott said as we slowed to a halt.
“Oh my God,” I said as I looked over to see Scott holding the gear stick as if it were a parade baton.
As usual, we drew spectators. We asked if anyone had a phone we could borrow.
“I do,” a young man said. “Only, there’s no talk time left” (A common problem.) So we gave him some money and off he went to buy a mobile phone scratcher card at the nearest shop. Twenty minutes later he was back as promised.
“Oh my God,” Azad said when Scott relayed the reason for our need of another tow.
Again, Emile was there within two hours. This time, Scott rode in Ndoto’s driver seat because Bongo refused. Instead, Bongo stood out in the rain on the tow truck bed for the fifty-five-minute ride back to town. From his vantage point, Scott studied what we would come to call our “Unattainable Summit.” Though Emile eyed the nyama hanging from hooks along the road, he didn’t stop to shop this time.
“An interesting perspective, being up so high, sitting backwards,” Scott said when we arrived at the repair shop.
Bongo just shook his head.
After Emile and all the men employed at City Motors said in chorus, “This car is so strong,” they got to work on welding the gear stick back on to its base. It was tricky working in such a small space with a welder, but they got it done.
Again, we were charged for towing, but Emile didn’t charge for the welding, which gave me pause at first.
It was 7:00 p.m. by then, so we went back to the Botanika for another absurdly decadent meal and decent sleep. We wanted to be well rested for our third attempt. It was to be our last attempt, no matter what. If we didn’t make it this time, we would leave the car with Adrien or Emile in Bujumbura for a week, and travel to Rwanda in one of the many minibuses adorned with names like “Yahoo,” “What God Wishes,” and “Volcano” that negotiated the Bujumbura to Kigali road, daily.
We still don’t know how we did it. We should have known every twist and turn, every banana stand and nyama market along the route by then. But somehow, we took a wrong turn.
“This doesn’t look right. It’s too flat,” Scott said. “Plus, I’ve yet to see a minibus, truck, or charcoal boy.” For whatever reason, we kept going, though it made no sense at all. We knew that at some point, we would have to climb or turn around, but we kept going. “At least it’s different,” he said, “and more level.” We mostly drove in silence, neither one of us wanting to say aloud that the sensible thing to do would be to turn back and start over. But we kept going.
After eight kilometers, the tar road narrowed and turned to dirt. The hills all around us, no matter how steep, were terraced, with every square inch under cultivation. Then, without warning, the dirt road suddenly came to a dead end at a hectic market, where hundreds of people and countless bushels of produce, competed for space. We spotted a few motorbikes, but there was not a single other vehicle in sight.
Still, we did not surrender.
We continued to inch forward. The crowd made room for us to pass. The track became nothing but a wide footpath, but we kept going.
A little while later, atop a narrow ridge that straddled two steep valleys, we drove by a school. It was an impossible sight. The crest of the hills came right up to the schoolroom doors. As we drove by, the children stared at us with wide eyes. That was the moment we really knew we were way off course. These kids had obviously not seen mzungus in a long time, or ever.
Our GPS indicated we were on what was, at one time anyway, a route to a Rwanda border post and that if we kept going, we would hit tar road in thirteen kilometers. So, we kept driving.
Just after passing the school, we descended a particularly slippery patch of track. A small child appeared from out of nowhere and motioned that we should STOP. Conveniently, there was a patch of tamped-down earth where we could pull off the road.
The child spoke in French, “Camion something-something-something,” while pointing downhill and around a bend. Meanwhile, children from the village gathered around to observe events unfold.
“I’ll stay with the car,” I said, and Scott walked down the muddy track to see why we could not pass Go. In only a few minutes, Ndoto attracted quite a crowd. I didn’t hear any English, though I was sure some were remarking how strong Ndoto looked, just by the expressions on their faces.
I took out my Swahili dictionary and read aloud. The men who knew some Swahili translated phrases such as, “Please, thank you, I am stuck in the mud” and “Do you know where I can find a mechanic?” into Kirundi, the language of Burundi.
I had to admit, I was more than a little nervous. Burundi was one of the hungriest nations in the world. The crowd of bystanders drew closer. Children cupped hands around their eyes and peered into Ndoto’s windows with curiosity and desire.
Most of the children were dressed in ragged clothes. All were barefoot. The Burundi school uniform was a muted-beige fabric that looked scratchy and hot. Every student wore uniforms that looked as if they had been handed down many times over.
One boy climbed up on Ndoto’s ladder and toyed with the zipper of the rooftop tent.
“Oye. Hands off the vehicle, s’il vous plie,” I said. I didn’t want to lose my cool, but I couldn’t let the kids climb all over Ndoto. It wasn’t that I was worried about dents or scratches. A few more would only add to her character. But Ndoto was like a 7-Eleven convenience store on wheels. There was so much stuff inside her. Whomever we encountered while driving—a policeman, a child, or someone we asked for directions—they’d always poke their head in the car, and time would stand still while they silently took inventory.
Sometimes, they gave voice to what their eyes desired.
“Give me some shoes,” a man working a control gate said after he noticed one of Scott’s two pairs of shoes (the other pair were on his feet) on a shelf in the rear of the car.
“But I need my shoes,” Scott said.
The man nodded, so off we drove.
When we arrived at our campsite on Lake Tanganyika, I said to Scott, “Remember that Emirates Airline blanket that Brian gave us? I’m going to make some curtains out of it for the back windows. There is no need to tempt people with our shoes or anything else we have on display.”
Five days later, when we drove back through the same control gate, Scott’s shoes were hidden from view, but the man remembered.
Again, he said, “Give me your shoes,” then he pointed through the curtain to the exact spot they sat on the shelf. He even described them. “Yes, I know they are there,” he said with a grin.
“But I still need my shoes,” said Scott.
So, there I was with quite a crowd of people pressing into Ndoto and me, all who needed shoes, while Scott was out of sight down the hill examining the camion.
“Madam, I am hungry,” one of the children said in French. Oh dear. I wanted to unlock the car and give them something. Everything.
On board, we had a bag of pasta, another of rice, and one of lentils. We also had olive oil, spices, a bag of onions, and some canned goods, in addition to packets of crackers. But to get at any of it, I would have to pull all the bins out of the back. Ndoto and her contents would be at their most vulnerable. And there were so many stomachs. I thought about what might happen if I put the contents of our mini-mart on display. As you drive your own vehicle through remote Africa, you hear stories. Not always good ones.
I stalled. We had a map of Africa taped inside a side window at the back that faced outwards, so we had a geography lesson—countries, capital cities, lakes, and rivers. Then, I asked with gestures to see the school notebook of one of the young students. He handed me his workbook on anatomy of all things. With a dull pencil, he had drawn incredibly good representations of lungs and of an appendix. His detailed notes were neatly written in French.
“These drawings are quite good. Tres bien. Would you like to be a doctor when you are older?” I asked.
There was no answer. Anything I asked must have sounded like “blah blah blah, doctor?” to the children who spoke little English. Besides, almost every kid you ask in Africa wants to be a doctor when they grow up, so the answer would probably be “Of course.”
Seeing his workbook gave me pause. This boy was bright, and he appeared to be getting a good education. But for the fact that he was born in an extremely remote part of impoverished Burundi, and not in the developed world, he might indeed have become a doctor. The thing about Africa was, he might still. One day he might encounter Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders) or a visiting nurse who would spark a desire, if it wasn’t there already, for medical school. He might encounter a teacher or Peace Corps volunteer who would recognize his passion and guide him in scholarship applications. This kind of thing did happen in Africa.
My tension disappeared. Instead, I was hopeful that this bright boy might get that opportunity. But, would there be enough time? Life expectancy in Burundi was fifty-six years of age. My emotions yo-yoed more than ever. At the top rested hope. At the bottom, pragmatism. Both were based on my African experience. For today, I choose hope. I handed the student his workbook with an encouraging smile.
Then Scott arrived. “There’s a mudslide at the bottom of the road. And a truck with about a ton of sand in the back is stuck in the mud in the middle of the road. We’re not going anywhere until the truck gets moved.”
“Oh geez. Stay here, would you? I want to see.” I walked down to look at the truck while Scott stayed with Ndoto and the children. At the bottom of the hill, a dozen mud-splattered men dug around deeply-embedded muddy tires. Every now and then, they took a shovel-load of what seemed to be precious sand from the back of their truck and placed it in the muck in front of the tires for traction.
The driver tried again and again to accelerate out of the bog. Each time, the men pushed the truck from behind, getting covered in more mud, while shouting encouragement to the truck and driver. This could take days, I thought.
One man spoke some English. He conveyed that since getting the truck unstuck would help us too, we should contribute to the effort. He was right. I walked back up to the car to discuss our options with Scott.
“If it starts to rain again,” he said looking up at the sky, “we’ll need to turn around and go back toward Bujumbura before we get stuck too. Or, maybe we can camp at the school and try again tomorrow. In any event, the guys down there need water.” He grabbed a five-gallon container of our water and headed back down the road.
About an hour had passed. I continued learning Kirundi and tried to think of a way I could get at those crackers without causing a run on the bank. Also, I wanted to make my food donation just as we were leaving, and not before. I kept one ear tuned to the sound of the truck at the bottom of the hill. I assumed that the louder and longer the men shouted, the greater the progress.
I looked at the children who never took their eyes off me. If I could get them to stand away from the vehicle, I could remove some food without them clinging to me.
I had observed teachers in Africa and knew that children always obeyed someone who spoke to them with a tone of authority, so I put on my best teacher face, clapped my hands twice, threw my arms out, and gathered about thirty children into a line on the far side of the road.
“Okay, stay here please,” I said indicating an invisible line at their toes. They must have thought an important geography lesson was about to begin because they stood stock-still and at attention. But, when I unlocked Ndoto’s rear door, they immediately began to inch forward. I closed the door and gently gathered them again to the far side of the road. They obeyed.
I opened the door, unloaded two bins, extracted several packets of biscuits, rice, and big bags of lentils, and put the bins away while the children waited patiently at the “Do Not Pass” line. I handed a packet of crackers to the eldest girl and indicated that she should take it to the men working on the truck down the road. After more pantomimed explanation on my part, the children moved in a tight cluster down the road.
Every woman the world over knows that when children are too quiet, they are probably up to something. The silence was deafening.
I walked down the slippery road, and as I came around the bend, I found the children quietly dividing the crackers amongst themselves. Just then I heard the truck on the move again, this time with more gusto. The men were shouting as if their team had just scored the winning touchdown at the Super Bowl.
I quickly returned to the car and readied all the remaining packets of crackers, bags of rice and lentils—most of the food we had on board—to give to the men. The truck groaned past me with all the men, including Scott, shouting and pushing and sweating. Once the truck tires were on somewhat graspable soil, I distributed the food to the men with please share gestures.
They were as eager as the children had been. One man was particularly interested in the zip lock bag that held the beans, and he repeatedly checked that the zip was doing its job. We said our “adieus,” engaged the four-wheel drive, and drove carefully down the slippery road.
The rest of what turned out to be a seven-hour day was anything but uneventful. After we conquered the quagmire where the truck had temporarily taken root, the track became even more narrow and rutted. If we were to encounter another vehicle coming the other way, it would have been impossible for us to move off the road and let it pass. But that turned out not to matter because the only vehicles we saw that day were the stuck truck and a Toyota Prado.
I was getting used to strange coincidences and the synchronicity of what happened to us in Africa, so it didn’t surprise me that we encountered the Prado, just minutes after we put Ndoto into a deep crevice.
We’d been nicely straddling an eroded ditch, a chasm deep enough to resemble a mechanic’s bay, when one wall of the ditch suddenly collapsed inward, abruptly dropping the passenger side of Ndoto, three feet down into the rut. She was in a fault so deep, that her right front tire was completely up in the air. Her back wheel was splayed out at such a weird angle, I thought we were done for good. There would be no Emile, no tow truck coming to rescue us here.
As we scrambled our way out of the vehicle to survey the situation, people began appearing from the nearby village. They wanted to help, but they wanted money first. Much discussion in French ensued, with Scott interjecting calmly in English, “First help dig, please. Then money, okay?” every few minutes. Once again, I felt a little nervous. There were so many people surrounding Ndoto with her skirt up. And I was frustrated. Why was there all this talking when we were just getting more stuck by the minute?
“Okay, I’ll do it myself,” I said to the crowd. I began gathering stones and chucking them under the car near the tires the way the ladies had done on the road to Kasama.
Dead silence. Scott interrupted my rock tossing. “Tris, if you or I would just put all our weight on the hood of the driver’s side—just lay on it—I think we can get some traction on this front tire and drive out of here.”
It was at this moment that the Prado, coming from the opposite direction, rambled up and stopped. They had to. We were blocking their way. I tossed another stone under the car and walked over to the occupants—four well-dressed Burundians.
“Bonjour. Ca va? Parlez-vous Anglais?” I asked.
Fortunately, their English was perfect. Ever the optimist I asked, “How is the road in the direction you have come?”
“The road is very bad. I advise you to turn back. Even if you get out of that ditch, your vehicle will not make it on the road ahead of you.”
The driver pointed back the way they had come. “Five hundred meters from here, the road has mostly disappeared down the mountain. You will not get through.” Africans hate giving bad news, so for him to tell me that it was impossible for us to advance on the road, meant he was honestly concerned.
“But you have come that way,” I said.
As though taking Ndoto’s feelings into account, the man said, “Yes, but our car is . . . newer. Yet, it was even very difficult for us. I wasn’t sure we would make it, and more of the road gave way right after we passed.”
As we spoke, I was unaware that the crowd had grown, and, perhaps shamed into action by a stone lugging mzungu woman, they took action.
With nothing but sheer brute force, men, boys, and soldiers from the village physically lifted Ndoto out of the ditch and pushed her forward onto solid land. Suddenly, unbelievably, and miraculously, Ndoto, with Scott at the wheel, appeared next to me. I’d never been so stunned.
I turned back to the passengers in the Prado. Their eyes were the size of saucers.
“Maybe you can get people like these to help you further ahead, but we still advise you to turn back to Bujumbura.” They drove off, the wider wheelbase of the Prado negotiating the gap without difficulty.
Scott had distributed our few remaining Burundi francs to the men who had helped us, and almost everyone wandered off to the village. Only a young teacher named Innocent, and a few children remained.
Innocent was the last to leave. “God Bless you, and good luck,” he said in a soft tone. He enveloped my hand with his two, in a warm embrace. As he walked away, I wondered about his future. I wished I had asked him how he saw it. But I was too preoccupied in finding a way to Rwanda before dark.
I conveyed to Scott what the people in the Prado had said about our chances of continuing. He walked down the road to investigate while I stayed with Ndoto.
Ten minutes later he was back. “I think we can manage. Our narrow wheel base will work to our advantage up ahead,” he said with a smile.
I checked the GPS again. It continued to insist there was a tar road, now only seven kilometers ahead, so we kept going.
“If need be, we can walk seven kilometers to the road,” I said thinking ahead to plan B, though, I thought we were already up to plan F by that point.
A young boy suddenly appeared by my side. I asked, in a mixture of French and pantomime, if the road ahead was bon, good.
“Non,” he said with conviction. But we climbed in Ndoto and carried on, with the boy trotting alongside us for a kilometer.
Three times, he alerted us when to stop to survey the road. Some of the time, I walked on the road with the boy. When we arrived at the spot where the side of the road had disappeared down the mountainside, I walked back to the car to get the camera.
The boy, as though thinking I was going to ride inside with Scott said, “No Madam!” and indicated that I should stay safely next to him. Gallantry lives on in remote Africa.
Scott drove slowly around the bend, barely keeping the tires in contact with the road on the downhill side. I did try to film it but evidently, I couldn’t bear to watch, not even through the viewfinder because most of the shaky footage was of the muddy road under my feet.
“Fini? No more bad road?” I asked the boy.
He indicated there was one more obstacle ahead. Again, we stopped. It was another slippery uphill blind curve.
Ndoto made it halfway around, before bogging in the squishy mud. Each time Scott inched forward, the boy and I threw large stones under the back tires. Ndoto slid back against the rocks. Scott inched forward, then back and forth he went, until Ndoto was on solid ground.
“Fini?” I said again, my eyes pleading.
“Oui. Yes. Fini.”
The boy asked for nothing. We were completely out of money, in any currency. He smiled when we handed him a cool drink, but by the look on his face when he drank it, Schweppes Tonic Water was not the best thing he’d ever tasted in his life.
The last six kilometers were sometimes slippery, often rutted, mostly narrow, and always steep.
Finally, after seven hair-raising and unpredictable hours, we caught a glimpse of a group of people and buildings at the crest of a hill. One last steep upgrade, with a hairpin right turn at the top, and we were suddenly on the elusive tar road. I was tempted to ask Scott to stop the car, so I could get out and kiss the road, but I thought better of it. I’d kissed a hippo, and I’d been licked on the lips by a giraffe, which was as icky as you could imagine, but I was sure kissing a tar road in Africa would be far worse.
“You are incredible,” I said to Scott as we chugged uphill.
All through the day, with every rut, every bend, and every bog, my admiration for Scott grew.
“Nothing today has fazed you one bit,” I added.
“It was fun,” Scott said as we rounded the last bend.
I looked at him with wonder. My heart swelled. How did I manage to luck out with such a man? “I’m so turned on right now,” I said, reaching over to give him an appreciative goat squeeze.
An hour later, we arrived at the Burundi-Rwanda Frontier with no issues, other than having to add another quart of oil, halfway there.
What I would see and feel in Rwanda would make our arduous day seem like a walk in the park.
NIGHTMARES IN CLEAN, GREEN RWANDA
Crossing the border from Burundi into Rwanda was like going from night to day. The tagline “Land of a Thousand Hills” was no exaggeration. If we weren’t driving upward, we were driving downward. The land was fertile. The roads were pothole free. There were sidewalks with curb and gutter. While we were inside completing immigration formalities at the border, someone washed Ndoto. Children looked more robust and food insecurity seemed less of an issue. Helmet wearing motorcyclists abounded. Plastic bags were illegal. And, though they must’ve been there, we didn’t spot anyone carrying a hoe.
After the genocide of 1994, NGOs and charitable organizations rushed in to provide small business loans, new sanitation systems, and sustainable agriculture to the tiny country. Memorial museums were built and new laws enacted to remind people they were not Tutsi or Hutu, but Rwandan. It is illegal in Rwanda to ask someone his or her ethnic background, even though, physically they are so different, anyone could tell. Tutsis are, for the most part, much taller than Hutus.
In Butare, an attractive university town, we camped at the Ibis Hotel. We later learned that it was one of the locations where Tutsis were slaughtered in 1994. Almost everywhere we stayed in the country had been a site of the massacre.
The Rwandan government estimated that out of a population of 7.3 million people, of whom 84 percent were Hutu, and 15 percent were Tutsi, between eight hundred thousand and one million people were slaughtered in one hundred days of machete-slashing brutality. About three hundred thousand Tutsi survived the genocide. Thousands of widows, many of whom were subjected to rape, became HIV-positive. There were around four hundred thousand orphans that remained. Nearly 85,000 of them were forced to become heads of families. I had trouble sleeping for the entire time that we were in Rwanda.
We met a Belgium doctor and his wife who had lived in Rwanda for fifteen years before fleeing the country at the beginning of the genocide. They had come back to Rwanda to locate people they hadn’t heard from since 1994. We asked the doctor about his impressions of the “new Rwanda.”
“On the surface, everything seems orderly, clean, and peaceful. But we can feel the anger and hatred that still brews underneath the facade. Twenty years later, we feel the same tensions we did when we lived here.”
We had heard and felt this sentiment often since crossing the border. I hoped I wasn’t becoming numb. The note in my journal that followed the memo of this exchange read: “Chinese Restaurant behind Kobil petrol station is good.”
Reminders of those one hundred shocking days were visible throughout the country. There were museums and memorial sites in place for just that reason. Ghosts were everywhere in Butare, a green, hilly, and pretty little town. But life went on. The youth especially seem to want to learn from the past and build a better Rwanda.
At a grand Catholic cathedral, we unintentionally crashed a lavish wedding. We weren’t supposed to notice, but it looked like Tutsis and Hutus alike were among the guests of the young couple. There were other encouraging signs of a changed Rwanda. Students, who walked from class to class at the University, seemed more interested in creating life, instead of destroying it. I wanted to believe that a repeat of that type of Genocide would not happen again, at least not in Rwanda. Still, I had trouble sleeping.
A few days before Christmas, we began receiving emails from both the U.S. and British consulates informing us that war had broken out in South Sudan. Serendipity had struck again. But for Ndoto’s reluctance to climb out of Burundi and into Rwanda, we could have been trapped in a war zone in South Sudan. Later, when a cease-fire was announced, we renewed our desire to visit South Sudan before we would have to begin our long transit back to South Africa, back to where Ndoto lived.
Christmas is always a difficult time to be away from home and family. On Christmas Day, we attended a three-hour long Mass at St. Michael’s Cathedral in Kigali. We sang “Deck the Halls” and “The Little Drummer Boy” along with five hundred Rwandans and nine mzungus. Communion took forever. It was wonderful.
Scott gave me a Christmas card that night. Inside he had written, “No one else, nowhere else.” I felt luckier than ever to be able to travel the world with a partner who dug exploration, unpredictability, and old Landys as much as I did.
An hour later, I read the card again and smiled. I knew he meant ‘Africa’ by nowhere else, not Kigali particularly. I mean, who would choose a bustling city in a country recovering from genocide in the heart of Africa over picnicking in Paris, or riding the waves at Waimea Bay, or sailing in Singapore? Well, I guess we would. But I knew he meant Africa and Ndoto and the whole package. His love made me happy and contented.
Our gift to each other in Kigali was a splash out at the upscale Hotel des Milles Collines. Not as romantic as it sounds. It was the hotel known as Hotel Rwanda in the movie by the same name. It was the place where more than twelve hundred people took refuge during the genocide.
During the massacre in 1994, hotel rooms were packed with ten or more, with more refugees living in the hallways on three floors. Tutsis sought haven at the Hotel. Because it was a hotel for foreigners, they thought this would guarantee their safety. But all the expats were evacuated within the first week.
The hotel was shelled and stormed several times, but none who stayed there died during the genocide. One life was added when a baby was born in Room 216. Drinking water came from the hotel pool, the same pool we swam in during our stay now, twenty years later.
I sat on a chaise lounge watching expats, NGO workers, local Rwandans, and tourists swimming with their children or having a drink at the pool bar. Was anyone thinking what I was thinking? Which of the guests was in Room 216? Could it happen again? Was anyone sleeping at night?
On top of an inability to get a restful night in Rwanda, I also contracted a nasty stomach bug. I wondered if Rwanda was making me sick. I couldn’t stop thinking about and imagining the slaughter.
I glanced over at Scott who was reading in the lounge chair next to me.
“Scott, how about we leave Rwanda? Maybe I’ll be able to sleep in Uganda.”
What I was really hoping was that the nightmares and visions of machetes and blood and horrific suffering would stop.
A MOTHER’S LOVE
We left Kigali after a visit to the well-stocked Nakumatt grocery store, where we found imported prosciutto and crème fraiche. I bought them, thinking a heavy western meal might help me sleep.
At the same hotel in Ruhengeri that Dian Fossey favored whenever she needed a break from research on mountain gorillas, we camped on a gravel parking space adjacent to Room 12, the room Fossey made her own. Everything was kept just the way it was the last time she had stayed there. I saw it and believed it was.
After sundowners, I used the ingredients from the Nakumatt store and made a meal of zucchini, crème fraiche, basil, and prosciutto on top of a mountain of bow-tie pasta. It was satisfying and filling, and all those carbs should have put me in a coma, but still, I didn’t sleep.
The next morning, we spread a map of Africa on Ndoto’s bonnet to plan our arrival at the Uganda border.
“Scott, look at this. Imbabazi is only forty kilometers from here.” I said, upbeat for the first time in days. It would probably mean another sleepless night for me since I was convinced that I wouldn’t rest easy until Rwanda, with all her pain, was in my rearview mirror. Still, I didn’t want to pass up a chance to see where Rosamond Carr, an uncommon American woman who took in children orphaned during the genocide, lived. I first learned about Ms. Carr when I read her book Land of a Thousand Hills, My Life in Rwanda.
In 1949, Carr and her filmmaker-explorer husband, moved from New York to the Congo. After they divorced, she moved to Rwanda and farmed Pyrethrum, a flower that produced a natural and effective mosquito repellent.
During the 1994 genocide, Rosamond began taking in orphans. The Red Cross heard about her and began bringing child survivors to her doorstep. Before long, she was housing more than seventy-two children in her huge drying shed.
Taking care of orphans became her purpose in life. She wrote in her autobiography, “I can only surmise that God didn’t feel I was ready to have children until I was eighty-two years old. Then he sent me forty all at once.” She later built a home for 120 children and called it Imbabazi, which means “A Mother’s Love.”
Call it timing, or serendipity, or synchronicity. If I hadn’t opened up the map that morning, we would have missed meeting two of the children that were raised at Imbabazi, Jacqueline and Felix, now in their twenties, who just happened to be at the orphanage that morning
A woman from Ohio was there too. Christie, whose mother had been a good friend of Rosamond, was working on turning the orphanage into a museum, honoring the lives not only of the children and Ms. Carr but also of Dian Fossey, who was Carr’s good friend. Christie went on to say that the orphanage had recently been shut down due to an unsustainable but well-intentioned new law that prohibited Rwandan children from living in orphanages. In addition to redesigning the dormitories into a museum, Christie was scrambling to find surviving relatives to take the few remaining children.
Twenty-one-year-old Jacqueline was one of the first to come to Rosamond as an infant during the genocide. Imbabazi has been the only home she has ever known. Jackie, with three dogs trailing behind her, took us on a tour of the grounds. Most of the buildings and rooms were empty. The only sign that children had once lived there, were a series of pencil marks on a door jamb, where someone had measured the height of the children from year to year.
“These are my marks. See, I drew a picture of myself next to this one.” Jackie pointed to a smiley face in a circle surrounded by curly hair. It looked like a modern-day emoji. “And here is a rabbit I drew.” Jackie continued her tour. “This is where we learned French and English. Over there is where we would paint and draw. In this room, we took our meals. Here is where I slept.”
I walked through the bare rooms picturing dozens of children playing, laughing, crying, and wishing they had a family to go home to. The more I listened to Jackie, the more I realized that she was the embodiment of Rosamond’s devotion. Scott agreed.
When we arrived at Rosamond’s gravesite, tears ran down Jackie’s face. “I always cry when I come here,” she said. “She was the only mother I have ever known. I’m alive because of her.”
We walked back to Ndoto wiping away tears of our own.
Before leaving, Jackie told us about the photo competition she’d won when she was eight. In 1999 a photographer named David Jiranek started a project called, Through the Eyes of Children. He gave instamatic cameras to all the children at Imbabazi. “Photograph whatever you want,” he told the children. The resulting images were so surprising, so moving and expressive, that they were shown at galleries in the United States and Europe. Jackie won first prize for her powerful image “Gadi at the Market” taken with her very first roll of film.
In David’s own words: “These are kids who thought nobody cared about them outside their world of the orphanage. I want people around the world to see these kids less as victims, which they of course are, but more as a possibility. When you get a smile from Frederic, a boy who lost both his arms during the genocide, and think about the horror he has experienced, you know that by giving yourself to his spirit, even for a moment, the world can be just a little bit better for it.”
Rosamond’s home, and her English gardens next to the orphanage, were simple yet exquisite. Pyrethrum, and an explosion of colorful flowers, surrounded her once whitewashed cottage, now covered in creeping fig. Rosamond cut and delivered her flowers to hotels on Lake Kivu and embassies in Kigali to raise funds for the orphanage. She died at ninety-two, living almost long enough to see all her children become independent adults.
It was a privilege seeing what Roz created, and I was especially grateful to meet and hug Jackie. But being in Rwanda was almost too much to bear. My heart felt heavy, full of sadness and awe. Must horrific things happen in the world before people do such good? Again, I asked myself if I was seeing too much to stay in love with a continent that, more and more, made me ache.
The border crossing into Uganda the next day was uneventful. We changed U.S. dollars to Shillings, paid the equivalent of US$21 for road taxes. And Lord, love a duck, we were on our way deeper into the heart of Africa.
My immediate impressions of Uganda were that the terrain was less steep than in Rwanda and there was still much land available for cultivation. It was far less densely populated. There were fewer cars, more smiling children, and a lot more speed bumps. Friday and Saturday nights were far more raucous in Uganda than they were in Rwanda.
We came to the turn for the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, one of the last remaining places on earth to see mountain gorillas. Scott took his foot off the gas.
“Gorillas?” he asked.
“Nah. I’m good.”
We had seen mountain gorillas in the wild in the former Zaire in 1995, when we had to hike all day from the Zaire border into the Virunga Mountains. We hunkered down in tents on an uneven slope with a cold mist making it hard to sleep. In the morning, machete-wielding guides led us higher and deeper into the jungle, hacking away vines, trees, and bushes as we climbed. It was an arduous hike, and we were eventually rewarded with an unforgettable sighting of a silverback gorilla watching over his family group. We didn’t think seeing gorillas in Bwindi, Uganda could be any better, nor wilder, than seeing them in the Virunga Mountains as we had.
More than anything, I needed to put some of the images of Rwanda out of my mind, and I desperately needed a good night’s sleep. We paid a woman named Prudence US$25 to camp on the lush grounds of the Cepha Hotel, located across from a golf course overlooking the Kabale town below. After a simple dinner of Greek salad and leftover pasta, I climbed up into my favorite bed in Africa and passed out. Unlike previous nights, not a single dream featured a machete.
STUCK IN REVERSE
I had big plans for our first dinner of the New Year: sweet-and-sour vegetables over Rice. We were at Camp Three in Uganda’s Queen Elizabeth II National Park.
The fees for Queen Elizabeth II were steep, even for a national park: US$40 per person per day, and US$150 for Ndoto. At those prices, you would have thought the names of the camps would be more inspiring than Camp One, Two, and Three.
Camp Three was drab and disappointing.
“Not what I imagined for our first camp of the new year,” I said as we parked on a weedy bluff overlooking Lake Edward. The bank was overgrown in brush so tall we couldn’t see the shoreline below. There was a rudimentary toilet but no shower, and the water that came out of a tap was dark orange. Even a bucket shower wasn’t appetizing.
There was an upside. Camp Three had a covered palapa, and it was pouring down rain. And once again, we had the entire camp to ourselves.
“Do you sometimes feel like we are the only ones overlanding this far into Africa? I mean, we’re usually the only vehicle at almost every organized camp we stay at.” I said amused.
When we could get them, we appreciated the running water and relative safety of organized camps. Some even had restaurants or little shops. When we camped in the wild, we expected and desired to be alone. But it would have been nice to meet up with other overlanders more often than we did at the organized or official campsites. The camps at Queen Elizabeth II were nothing more than an expensive patch of cleared bush.
I covered our little table with our small white tablecloth, filled an empty Bombay Gin bottle with some yellow wildflowers, and began cooking. Over drinks, we talked about our journey to date and how it had been both sweet and sour.
“That’s why I chose this meal for New Year’s Eve,” I said, measuring out the rice. “I’ve been hoarding this sweet-and-sour seasoning packet for just this occasion.”
No resolutions were made. We looked back instead of forward. We reminisced about the first time we set eyes on Ndoto and about Angie’s G-Spot. We talked about the pilgrimage to South Luangwa and how we hoped to take our family there some day. We recalled the two unsuccessful ascents from Burundi to Rwanda. Mostly, we felt overwhelmingly grateful to be in Africa, living a lifestyle that we both loved.
I was hoping for another good sleep, but the lulling sounds of elephant, hippo, and hyena were drowned out by blaring music from an all-night disco across the lake. I was awake most of the night. Nonetheless, on New Year’s Day, I felt refreshed and renewed. Birds sang. Antelope and warthogs roamed through the camp. I gave Ndoto her first bath of 2014.
“It’s going to be a great year,” I said as I buffed her headlights.
“Tris, you say that every year.”
“Why wouldn’t I say that? I’m exactly where I want to be with the only one I want to be here with. I’m having the time of my life. We’re nearing our goal of South Sudan. We’re seeing places we couldn’t have ever gotten to without our own vehicle, which just happens to be the greatest vehicle to overland Africa, ever. Why wouldn’t I be optimistic?”
Scott shook his head and looked at me with a mixture of appreciation and bewilderment. “Well, Tris, I’m lucky that you like to do this. That you like to camp. That you don’t mind roughing it. Not that many of my friends envy me traveling Africa the way we do, but if they did, their wives would probably not enjoy it as much as you do.”
“Mind roughing it? I love this adventure we are on.”
“Have you made the bed yet?” Scott asked with a smile.
I put down the shammy cloth and climbed up the ladder.
Later, we drove to the upscale Mweya Lodge in the park, where I booked a facial and Scott booked a shave at the hotel spa. I thought about getting a pedicure as well, but I was too embarrassed to show my feet. My heels had become as tough as elephant hide.
We moved to Camp Two because it was more remote and private, but tsetse flies invaded Ndoto and repeatedly inflicted their painful bites on Scott and me during the drive. “Leopard Loop” lived up to its name when we spotted a young leopard lying in the grass near the road. Sadly, he too was being pestered by tsetse flies. Instead of resting up for the hunt, he continuously swatted at and bit the irksome pests. It was a stupendously uncomfortable game drive.
We spent the last night in the park at Camp One. Of the three campsites, that one had the best views of the river.
When we arrived at the entrance to the small, secluded camp, there was a hugely pregnant elephant in our way. She was alone and laboring heavily. We waited in silence, hoping to witness the miracle of birth, but after ten minutes, she moved off. It was enough to have seen her.
Perhaps it was this bit of euphoria that caused us to orient Ndoto precariously on the edge of the high cliff overlooking the water. We had tried three other spots, but none were as scenic as the one that had Ndoto’s rear tires planted almost on the rim of the cliff.
“Geez, not so close,” I said as Scott backed Ndoto near the edge. I looked around at the small space. “Where will I put the table and chairs?”
“We can put them against the side door. Look at this view.”
It was stunning. The sun was setting over the lake, and somewhere nearby an elephant was being born. I wished for someone in a hot-air balloon to float over the scene at that moment and snap a photo. I would title it Dreams Do Come True.
“Scott, I’m going to pull her forward just a tad. That sheer edge is making me nervous.” I got behind the wheel to engage first gear, but the gear stick wouldn’t dislodge from reverse.
Scott got behind the wheel and tried to engage any gear more forcefully than I had. She wouldn’t budge. Ndoto was stuck in reverse.
We looked at one another. Scott mixed two gin and tonics. I prepared dinner. After eating we again tried to coax the stick shift forward without success.
“Let’s worry about it in the morning,” Scott said sipping a second drink.
“What if she rolls backwards in the night?”
Scott dug out our passports and cash and divided them between us. “If she starts to roll, just jump clear.” Then he placed stones behind the rear tires and went to bed in the rooftop tent.
“Ach!” I found a bag of Doritos in the pantry and ate them all before climbing gingerly up the ladder and into bed. I listened to hyena, leopard, elephant, and lion all through the night. I wanted to wake Scott and say, “Good thing we’ll have our passports on us after Ndoto plunges over the cliff. Then we can hitch a ride to the next border post on the back of a hippo.” But I didn’t. Instead, I fell asleep.
Eight hours later, at dawn when all usually seemed brighter, Ndoto was still stuck in reverse.
Scott came up with an idea. “Tris, you sit behind the wheel and take the car out of gear by depressing the clutch. Ease up on the brake, and I’ll push the Landy from behind. Turn the wheel as far as you can to the left. When I stop pushing, hit the brakes and turn the steering wheel the opposite direction as far as you can, then let it roll back. Then I’ll push again. Since it looks like she’s stuck in reverse gear for good, we want to have Ndoto’s rear facing the road so we can reverse out of here.”
I still can’t fathom how he managed to push Ndoto by himself, but he did. He pushed, I turned and let her roll back a few feet, and he pushed and so forth, until Ndoto had her tail end to the dirt road, which was the only way out.
I stayed in the driver’s seat with my hands in my lap and my foot on the gas pedal while Scott sat on his knees next to me, facing backwards. He kept his hand on the steering wheel, so that he could steer.
“Okay, give it a little gas,” he’d say. Or, “Slow down, there’s a warthog in the road.”
We drove backwards for a nerve-racking seven kilometers, until we reversed up the escarpment to the Mweye Hotel. Again, I wished for a drone or a photographer in a hot-air balloon over us.
When we arrived backwards at the gate, a man leaned in and looked at us the way a polite person would if they were trying not to notice a huge zit or a hairy wart. “Good afternoon. You seem to have a problem,” he said wisely. That’s the thing about Africa. No one is ever surprised by disaster.
“Yes, a bit,” Scott said. “We’re stuck in reverse.”
The man lifted the control gate and we drove backwards into a deserted little Shell petrol station.
“I’ll call someone to help you.” Solomon took out his cell phone and called his friend Robert. Soon young Ugandans, Robert, Chris, and Gideon, arrived on the scene.
They took apart the floorboard around the stick shift and discovered that the ball at the bottom of the stick had become wedged behind a metal flange. “Yes, it is stuck,” they confirmed. While they worked to dislodge the ball, I made tuna sandwiches and offered them to the men.
Gideon looked dubiously at the tuna. “Is it meat?” he asked.
“It’s tuna.”
Gideon set his jaw.
“It’s fish,” I said, and he promptly took a sandwich, then another.
Three hours, six tuna sandwiches, a can of Pringles, and the equivalent of eighteen dollars later, gear stick in a slightly different position but working, Gideon, Chris, and Robert said so long, and thanks for all the fish.
A KITTEN NAMED OIL CAN
We drove to Fort Portal, a town of sixty thousand people, named for a British Diplomat, who, in 1893 during the scramble for Africa, re-designated Uganda from a territory under The British East India Company to a British Protectorate. He died five months later, but the name stuck. Uganda remained a British Colony until independence in 1962.
Fort Portal is one of Uganda’s prettiest towns. It’s hilly and lush and is known for its tea. At the Garden of Eden Camp, we parked on a patch of grass across from a partially thatched bar and kitchen. Except for a few locals at the bar (none of whom were drinking tea), we were the only guests. After marginally satisfactory showers in an unlit room made of reclaimed wooden pallets, gaps and all, the owner-chef made us chapatis for dinner. They were like quesadillas only they were stuffed with goat meat, not cheese.
In the morning, over coffee and rusks, I complemented the owner on his extensive garden.
“Would you like a tour?” he asked. He picked up a meat cleaver the size of a cricket paddle and said, “This way.”
Did we have a choice? I thought, and mouthed “What the hell?” at Scott who fell in-line behind me.
Using the cleaver as a pointer, he showed us a hamerkop nest, which was about eight times the size of the bird, and a strange insect that disguised itself by adhering sticks to its body. The steel on the chef’s shiny stainless cleaver reflected the sun and cast light on caterpillars in metamorphosis that were clumped together on a tree. The caterpillars oozed copious amounts of fluid, which dropped from the tree on us like raindrops.
I was usually more relaxed in nature. Especially, in a garden so beautiful with creatures so unique. But the way the chef was swinging his knife around, made me nervous. Three times I started to ask, “Um, what’s with the meat cleaver?” but didn’t. Maybe he took pride in being a chef. Or maybe he didn’t like having his most prized possession out of his sight.
The gear stick repair was holding well so far, but we weren’t convinced that Gideon’s fix of the stick shift was a long term one, so we searched for mechanics in town for a second opinion. An Indian shopkeeper at a corner store referred us to a repair shop nearby, “The one with the Yamaha sign,” he said.
The sign should have read, “Home of a Pitiful Kitten,” because after driving Ndoto onto the lift and discussing the stick shift repair with the shop owner, John, we noticed a little kitten that was covered head to toe in black motor oil, sitting up against an exterior office wall. Next to the kitten was a bowl of milk and a pile of Kapenta fish.
“Yesterday, she fell into a barrel of oil,” John’s son Van said.
Noticing our dismay at the state of the little creature, Van took the kitten by the scruff of the neck and dragged it gently back into the sunlight.
“I think he believes the sun will help dry out the oil,” I said to Scott. The kitten gave itself a few useless licks to remove the oil. “We have to do something.” I looked for John. “Do you have a computer we could borrow?” I asked. “And can you connect us to the Internet?”
He led us to his office.
I typed “How to remove motor oil from a cat” into a search box, which gave a surprising number of results. While we looked up the remedy for oil-covered cat, the tiny kitten clawed her way up Scott’s bare legs and buried her face into his lap leaving a trail of used motor oil in her wake.
“Okay, it says here that we need to rub sugar and margarine all over the cat. That’s weird. I’ll go and see about ingredients.”
I left Scott with the kitty and stopped at several small shops to ask for margarine. Each time, they thought I was asking for marijuana.
“No,” I said waving away the offer. “I need something like butter.” Finally, I spotted what I needed on a shelf behind the counter. “One tub of Blue Band please,” I said, “and a small portion of sugar.”
Back at the shop, Scott had already taken our small pot and propane stove from the back of Ndoto and heated some water, so that we could later wash the butter-sugar concoction off the kitten.
I spread a towel while Scott, kneading the mixture like an expert pastry chef, blended the margarine and sugar together. We placed the kitten in our dishwashing basin and began massaging the solution into her fur.
The mechanics in the shop were transfixed. One impulsively reached over and dipped his finger into the mix to verify that indeed we were smearing actual food onto a cat. He smelled it, touched it to his lips, and then licked it off his finger. The other mechanics stood watching him.
“Yes, it is food,” he seemed to say with a nod.
The mechanics discussed the odd scene in their own language for some time. I could tell that what we were doing seemed a waste of time, money, and food to them. But as the mixture began to miraculously absorb the oil, and the tiny kitten went from being covered in black to her natural white and gray fur, they smiled and nodded their approval.
“Do you think we should do another application?” I asked Scott.
“At least one more,” he said wiping oil from the kitten’s right leg.
After three margarine and sugar treatments and a bath, we dried the kitten, wrapped her in a fresh towel, and carried her into the office, where she sat on Scott’s lap purring.
“I’ll take care of her,” Van said. “I’ll feed her and make sure she stays out of vats of oil.”
“What shall we name her?” I asked.
“What about Oil Can?” said Van smiling.
While we were giving Oil Can her life-saving spa treatment, John was tending to Ndoto.
“That gear stick repair should hold up as long as the car does,” he said, “but you definitely need some welding done on your frame. I can fix it, but the electricity doesn’t come on in town until 6:00 p.m. so, you’ll have to leave the Landy here overnight.” He phoned a woman who could provide us a place to sleep nearby, who was there within minutes to collect us.
Carol Adams ran Y.E.S. (Youth Encouragement Services), a hostel in a bucolic setting on a hill, overlooking a grassy valley, dotted with healthy-looking milk cows. Y.E.S. was primarily a home for HIV-positive orphans.
“How did you come to run an orphanage in Uganda?” I asked Carol.
“It was totally unexpected. I had a busy and happy life in Hawaii, where I worked as a horse trainer. Then one night, I had a dream—more like a vision I guess, urging me to go to Uganda and help orphans. I had never been to Africa, never had a desire to go to Africa, but the next day I booked a one-way flight to Uganda. The first year was rough. I didn’t know a soul, nor did I have a clue on how to run an orphanage. I was naive to say the least, and a few people took advantage of me. I was nearly out of money when my brother suddenly passed away. He left all his money to me for my orphanage. With the money, I bought this land and built a home for HIV-positive children. That was ten years ago.”
Still making plans at seventy years old, Carol wanted to build a vocational center for the older children. She didn’t think what she was doing was remarkable.
“These HIV-positive children are usually the last children to be adopted, so, essentially, I’m their mother.”
There were purely good, Mother Teresa-types like Carol all over Africa that you never hear about, unless serendipity, or a forty-year-old Land Rover in need of repairs, leads you to them.
A PRISON VISIT
After John completed welding the chassis and tightening dozens of nuts and bolts on Ndoto, we left Fort Portal loaded with the confidence a newly welded frame could provide, ready to explore deeper into The Pearl of Africa.
We camped on the grounds of a guesthouse in Masaka, a town frequented by do-gooders looking for a cause. We met a man from Manchester, England named Stuart who was volunteering at a nearby orphanage.
“When I first arrived, I was shocked to see that the children weren’t being fed anything but pap (ground maize),” Stuart said. “I began using my own money to buy food, and when that ran out, I asked my friends back home to send money to feed the children.” He paused before continuing. “At first, I gave the children three proper meals a day: breakfast, lunch, and dinner, with dessert too after dinner.” He paused again, a pink hue blushing his cheeks. “But I guess it was too much because all the children became ill.”
Pap, is a porridge made usually of ground corn. It’s called sheema in Zambia and sudza in Botswana and Zimbabwe. It’s an everyday staple for the majority of Africans. By “proper meals” Stuart meant he was feeding them a typical British diet, which is not terribly healthy for Brits, let alone children whose stomachs were accustomed to just one meal a day.
“I’m still working there,” Stuart said, “but I understand better now. I found that by supplementing the pap with just a little protein each day, even just a few kapenta, results in better outcomes. The kids are healthier and have better grades.”
This was a fairly typical cause and effect African story coming from someone new to the institution of charity work. He was a good person, and his heart was in the right place, but when trying to do something good in the developing world, one must understand the culture and consider unintended consequences.
That night, as we sat eating dinner next to Ndoto, a woman named Tina paid us a visit.
Tina and her husband owned a backpacker guesthouse called Hornbill on Bugala Island, part of an archipelago of eighty-four Ssese Islands in Lake Victoria. “I heard you are going to the Ssese Islands,” Tina said.
“Yes, we are going to Bugala Island,” Scott said.
Tina proceeded to tell us another uniquely African story, this one a tale of jealousy and woe. “My husband is in prison in the Bugala jail,” she said.
According to Tina, “policemen, or thugs,” rushed their camp and smashed everything in sight. “I didn’t see him do it, but my husband, Dika, may have hit a policeman,” Tina said. “Anyway, he was arrested and has been sitting in jail on the island for nearly two months.” It was Tina’s theory that the owners of the upscale resort next door to Hornbill were responsible for the invasion, as they were keen to get control of the prime beachfront land leased by Tina and Dika.
In the meantime, Tina told us she had moved to the mainland and hired a lawyer to help gain Dika’s release.
“Wow. That’s quite a story. Is there anything we can do to help?” I asked.
“Yes, if it isn’t asking too much,” Tina said, “since you are going to Bugala tomorrow, would you mind visiting Dika at the prison and giving him these?” She handed us a book, a letter, and the equivalent of four American dollars. We took the small care package and told her we would do our best to see Dika.
The next day, we drove forty-three kilometers to Bukakata Pier. The Bugala ferry looked clean and well maintained. Boarding was efficient and orderly, and we left the dock right on time. There were seven vehicles, a few bicycles and motorbikes, and around sixty passengers on foot. We were surprised that the ferry wasn’t crammed with people and goods for the thirty-minute ride since it was free of charge. It turned out we paid the price for our moment of leisure on the bone-crushing road to Kalangala, our destination on Bugala Island and the location of the prison.
“I’m glad our return trip to the mainland will be on the car ferry that goes to Entebbe from Kalangala. The dock is right next to where we’ll be camping,” said Scott.
By taking the Kalangala ferry, we’d save time and forego the snarling, clogged-like-a-sorority-house-shower-drain, traffic that was Kampala.
The town of Kalangala was tiny, but we still had to stop at a small shop to ask for directions to the prison. We saw a man walking on the main road in shackles, so we knew we were close.
“Are you going to see that mzungu?” the female shop owner asked. “You can’t miss him. He is the only mzungu in the prison. It’s just up that road,” she said, pointing to a three-way intersection.
The prison looked more like a coop than a jail, but there was a sign on the chicken wire that read “Uganda Prison.” A wooden gate was ajar, so we walked in.
There were four shacks, two on each side of a small dirt yard. A few women and men washed food bowls at a long, narrow bench at the back of the yard. We counted around twenty prisoners dressed in bright-yellow uniforms; long skirts for the ladies, and knee-length pants for the men. Sitting in small tight clusters on the dirt or darting between the legs of the prisoners, were dozens of ducks and ducklings. There was one white man sitting on a bench. He was very thin and had shoulder length blond hair. He stood, looked at us, and shrugged.
Dodging a family of ducks, he walked toward us announcing, “These mzungus must be here to see me.”
A heavyset female in a guard uniform walked over and stood in Dika’s path while greeting us with a tight smile.
“You are welcome here,” she said in the way most Africans and mzungus speak to one another, with formality and politeness. She directed us toward some plastic chairs on a wooden porch in front of a shack near the gate. Then she asked for our identification and wrote our details down on a sheet of paper attached to a clipboard. Dika sat near us on a third chair.
“Hi, Dika. We met your wife last night in Masaka. She asked us to give you these.” I handed him the book, along with the letter and the ten thousand shillings.
The guard immediately seized the package. She examined everything including Tina’s note, which was written in German. She promptly handed the note to Dika saying, “You may have this. I can’t read it.”
Soon, a man who said he was “Henry the Warden” joined us with his hands in his coat pockets.
I stood and told him why we were there. He had a smile that didn’t seem genuine. Not only that, when I shook his hand, it felt warm, sticky, and damp. I couldn’t help but wonder if he might have had one of the ducklings in his pocket. I stole a peek at my hand. It had, what looked like, baby duck poo on it. Super gross.
We all sat. Everyone smiled tightly. I doubted the prison received many, if any, mzungu visitors, so I was sure the guard and warden were wondering why we were there. There was an air of distrust and cautious respect, like at the first meeting during a treaty negotiation. I’d never been to a prison, and, since I was raised Catholic, I pretty much walked around looking guilty all the time. It was bad. When Scott tried to sneak booze onto a cruise ship, I couldn’t be anywhere near him. The one time I was, the woman at embarkation said, “Good morning, welcome” and I responded, “We have rum.” So, I was nervous. I dangled my duckling-poo hand over the arm of the chair.
Poor Dika.
He kept saying, “I don’t know what’s happening.” And then he would raise his hands and shake his head, as though struggling to grasp his predicament.
I figured it wouldn’t hurt to keep Dika’s hopes up. I told him what I knew that his wife was meeting with a lawyer and that he might expect to be released soon.
While Dika read the letter from Tina, I looked around the prison yard. I was curious about the women prisoners, so I asked the guard why they were arrested.
“They have struck their husbands. They have beat their husbands or killed them,” she said with a wave of her hand.
Dika continued to stare off into the distance. There was nothing else to add, so we stood to say goodbye. We wished Dika well. I impulsively shook hands again with Henry the Warden, which I regretted immediately and thanked everyone for their hospitality.
Once in the car, Scott said, “That was weird.”
“No kidding. I bet this is the only prison in the world where ducks quack around the feet of the inmates. Would you hand me a wet wipe? There’s duck poo on my hand.”
We drove away from the prison not sure which column to put this experience. Culture? Destination? Good Deed? Wildlife? We decided it had a column of its own and Scott had called it. Weird.
We checked in down the road at the Ssese Islands Beach Hotel, which allowed camping. I loved that about Africa. I couldn’t imagine showing up at a resort hotel in America and asking if I could camp on their beach, but in Africa, it is not uncommon.
Scott backed Ndoto over the white sand to the water’s edge and opened the rooftop tent, so that it hung over the water.
“There,” he said. “How do you like your overwater bungalow? You’ve had a hankering to stay in one for years. Now you’ve got one.”
“Hmm. I kind of meant one in Tahiti. I still mean one in Tahiti.”
But it did look nice. Palm trees framed our camp so perfectly that I snapped a photo and uploaded it to social media. The editor of go! South Africa magazine saw it and asked permission to use the photo in a “Best of Africa” feature. Ndoto, ever the rock star, would have her first full-page spread.
From our chaise lounges, we watched kingfishers dive into the water and come up with a fishy morsel. Hotel staff delivered beer and goat skewers to us on the beach. Every day at 4:00 p.m., we watched boys and young men play football on the grassy field behind our camp. We were in no hurry to leave. After all, we could see the Entebbe ferry dock from our campsite and would be able to watch the ferry approaching at a distance, so we relaxed and enjoyed our “overwater bungalow.”
Then, we met Zilla and Cheryl, expats from the U.S. and Great Britain, who’d been living in Uganda for five years.
“Have you heard the news?” Cheryl asked. “The Entebbe car ferry is out of service for the next few months. The only ferry running is the one at Bukakata.”
“Nooooo!” said Scott.
In the morning, we drove all the way back to the car ferry at Bukakata. We ferried back to Masaka and became predictably stuck in a Kampala traffic jam. The only saving grace of the journey was that while stuck in traffic, we could engage in interesting or entertaining conversation with other drivers.
We became friendly with three young men in a delivery truck as we moved at a snail’s pace side by side in the traffic.
One named Dyer Martin commented on Ndoto’s strength. “I would give anything to be your driver. Please let me be your driver. I can take you anywhere you want to go.”
“We already have a driver. Me. I’m the driver. And we’re already going everywhere we want to go,” Scott said laughing.
Dyer laughed too, then his face went slack as he said, “But can’t you give us something?”
Scott reached into the dash and handed him one of our calling cards that we had made in Kigali. It had a photo of Ndoto on Kubu Island.
“There. Now you can dream of Ndoto as much as my wife does.”
The next day, I checked email at our camp along the Nile River in a town called Jinga. “Scott, guess who sent us an email? Dyer Martin. I’ll read it to you.”
“I am one of the boys you met in Kampala traffic yesterday. I am glad to make friends with you because it is friends that will build the world.”
“It is friends that will build the world,” I said. I couldn’t have said it better. It became our new travel motto.
DRINKING THE NILE
Jinga is located on the southern shore of Lake Victoria. It’s at the source of the Nile River, which was why I wanted to go there. Scott wanted to go because he’d read online about a weeklong kayak course at Nile River Explorers.
“We can camp there too, Tris. I’d like to kayak the Nile and learn how to do an Eskimo roll,” he said. “Would you like to sign up too?” he asked already knowing what my answer would be. Scott had wanted to master an Eskimo roll as much as I had never wanted to do one.
“No thanks. You know I have a fear of drowning,” I said.
“No, you don’t. Your phobia is having a sharp object in your eye,” he said to remind me.
“That’s true,” I said and thought so you have been listening. “But drowning is right up there next to pointy things in my eyes.”
An Eskimo roll is a self-rescue maneuver used when a person capsizes in a kayak. When the kayaker is upside-down and being carried downriver by powerful rapids, he or she would need to use the paddle against an incredible force of water to sweep the rapids around him and push himself upright, all while holding his breath and trying not to panic.
There were so many aspects of white-water kayaking that didn’t fill me with desire. Using muscles was one of them. It was all I could do to pull myself up into Ndoto’s passenger seat every day. It would take a whole lot more spinach to make me strong enough to paddle right-side up in class five rapids, much less while underwater. Why would I want to risk dying in a wetsuit?
“So, no,” I said. “I’m quite happy to sit on shore and dream of other Nile River explorers. And sundowners.”
David, an experienced oarsman who worked at Nile River Explorers, met us where we set up camp on a grassy knoll overlooking a bar deck and the river beyond. “I’ll be your instructor,” he said to Scott. “And this is Shaggy,” he said, introducing a wiry young man with some impressive dreadlocks. “He’ll paddle the rescue kayak.”
Looking at his dreads, I thought they looked like lifelines and might come in handy for Scott to grab onto during a rescue.
In the morning, Scott made his way down the steep bank to the river, determined to master an Eskimo roll while negotiating the heady waters of the Nile. That afternoon, he dragged his waterlogged body back up the slope and collapsed in our hammock. It appeared that Shaggy and his dreads had been busy.
David stopped by our camp after dinner to ask, “Tomorrow?”
Scott said, “Yes.”
After class each day, and after Scott had recovered in the hammock, we had a chance to compare notes with other overlanders. Because the world was so small in Africa, we ran into Sarah Richardson, the doctor who had helped lift our tent onto Ndoto’s roof at Karl and Mandy’s Lodge in South Africa, at the camp bar.
“How is Ndoto?” she asked over quesadillas and drinks on the deck.
“She’s great. Thanks in part to you and the others at Jembjo’s who helped us get her ready for the road.”
We lifted our glasses and drank to adventures in an old Landys, Africa, and Karl and Mandy. “What brings you to Uganda?” I asked Sarah.
“I live here part of the time, seeing patients and volunteering as medic for big kayaking events. How’s the kayaking going, Scott?”
“I feel like I’m being beaten up slowly. I spend more time underwater than not. But it feels good to push myself. I want to do just one damn Eskimo roll, then I’ll be done.”
A couple at the next table leaned over. “Excuse me, sorry to interrupt. Do I detect a North American accent? It’s the first we’ve heard in quite a while. Where you are from?” asked Matt, a ranger at Yosemite National Park in California, our home state.
We hit it off immediately as one would when meeting someone from home on the other side of the world.
“What are you doing here in Uganda?” I asked Matt.
“I wanted to show Lissie where I was in the Peace Corp in Malawi. Now, we’re just traveling around as much of Africa as we can until we have to get back to work. Lissie is a ranger at the park too.”
“What did you do in the Peace Corps,” I asked.
“Fish farming. But unlike many former Peace Corp volunteers, who lament that the projects they worked were not sustainable, I DID make a difference,” he said with a grin. “I taught a man how to make corncob pipes, so that he would stop using his son’s homework as rolling papers for cigarettes.”
By the third day of Eskimo-roll training, Scott was so full of Nile River water that his ears were plugged, and he talked as if he had a gallon of water up his nose, because he did. The Eskimo roll eluded him.
“Maybe I should try it in a pool first,” he said.
Before we left, I checked email again. Two stood out: One from the U.S. Consulate and another from U.K.GOV, which advised against all travel to South Sudan. After a brief cease-fire, the war was back on in full force. Borders were closed indefinitely. Our plans to visit the newest country in the world, South Sudan, were cancelled for good. Uganda would be as far north as we could get.
It was time to turn Ndoto south, back to the barn.
Ndoto zooms across a dry salt pan on the way to Kubu, a granite island in the middle of an ancient sea.
Tris takes a walk on the salt pan.
Decisions, decisions. At a crossroads to three countries.
Camped at “No Camp” near the campground at Chobe Safari Lodge in Botswana.
A woman and two boys get a lift in Ndoto.
Camped on the escarpment at Sinamatella in Hwange National Park, Zimbabwe.
Watching the wildlife in the valley from our campsite in Hwange.
Elephants have to dig in the dry riverbeds for water in the dry season. Hwange National Park.
Elephants looking for water in the dry riverbed near Leon Varley’s camp in Hwange.
Transporting ourselves and Ndoto across Lake Kariba on the Kariba Ferry.
Woman waves goodbye after we gave her a lift to her village on the Old Petauke Road.
Elephants were most often calm and relaxed around Ndoto.
The Old Petauke Road.
A man transports building material by bicycle on the Old Petauke Road.
Sundowners along the Luangwa River.
We made a practice of stopping for sunset every day, if we could.
Tris at her happiest place, at Flat Dogsalong the Luangwa River in Zambia.
Monkeys most often used Ndoto as a gymnasium. The tent fly was their trampoline.
Ndoto’s first river crossing by manpowered pontoon ferry, Luangwa River, Zambia.
Scott pulls the pontoon ferry while Tris waits on the opposite shore.
Sticks laid on the sand for traction.
Vendors weave their way through cars during rush hours. Even a power saw can be purchased in the slow ooze that is Lusaka traffic.
Volunteers help shift another vehicle to make room for Ndoto to exit the seized car lot at Zambian Customs.
This is what happens when Scott cuts Tris’ hair on the beach at Lake Tanganyika. She ends up looking like Prince Valiant.
When we lose a bolt from Ndoto’s gear box, passers by help us find a match from elsewhere on the vehicle.
The same day we lost the gear box bolt,Ndoto ended up in a ditch.
Our first Good Samaritans of a very challenging day.
Victoria Pheri with her “more than a friend.”
The gates at Katavi National Park, Tanzania.
Desperate hippos crowd into the last remaining pool until the rainy season begins.
Tempers flare.
Our own private Serengeti, Katavi National Park, Tanzania.
Just a few hundred yards from the summit, the gear stick sheared off at the base.
The sign was accurate.
Young men on bicycles hitch a ride up a mountain pass between Burundi and Rwanda.
We waited hours for a tow truck to arrive, then the driver stopped twice on the way back to Bujumbura to buy nyama, meat.
On our third attempt to reach Rwanda, we were lost on a road that led to a crowded weekly market, and a precariously steep, muddy path to the border. In seven hours, we saw only two other vehicles.
Jacqueline came to Rosamund Carr’s Imbabazi orphanage as an infant during the Rwandan genocide.
A kitten fell that in a vat of used motor oil, climbed onto Scott’s lap and buried its face in his arm.
The kitten, after we washed it in a solution of margarine and sugar, in the office of the mechanic who was welding Ndoto’s frame.
Carol Adams runs an HIV orphanage in Fort Portal, Uganda.
Camped on Lake Victoria in the Ssese Islands, Uganda.
The road to Kalangula was brutally long.
Some “Charcoal Boys” even hung on to Ndoto, on our first attempt to reach Rwanda.
It’s no wonder they call the lodge fronting the river in Samburu National Park The Elephant Bedroom.
The Land Rover repair shop in Isiolo, Kenya.
The gates to Samburu National Park, Kenya.
Nanyuki camp in Kenya came with a baby camel.
Onyango, the Riverside Camp attendant in Samburu, offered to fix our broken leaf spring.
THE SPEED TRAP
Just three hours after crossing the border from Uganda, we were caught in a speed trap in Kenya. We could see a mass of trucks, cars, and buses clustered at the bottom of a hill, but we didn’t see the police until too late. Up went their arms.
Halt!
We pulled over. Soon, a plump police woman came to the window saying briskly, “You have been caught over speeding.”
Wasn’t speeding enough? What was over-speeding? I wanted to ask.
“The fine is one-hundred-and-twenty American dollars,” she said. “And I know you can afford it.”
“Speeding? Impossible.” Scott and I said in unison.
She brought the radar gun and showed us a photo of Ndoto doing 64 km/h in a 50 km/h zone, only possible because she was on a long descent.
“Oops. Pole sana. Sorry,” I said, admitting guilt. “You see, we’ve been driving in Africa for more than eight months. We drove all the way from South Africa to Uganda, and now we have to drive all the way back. We never knew before now that our car could go that fast. Even downhill.” I chuckled.
The police officer stared down her nose at me and Ndoto.
“But isn’t she strong?” I added as a last resort.
Another policewoman, Susan, came to my window. “You have three options,” she said. “I can arrest you and take you to jail now. Or, you can pay the fine for which I will give you a receipt. Then, you may appear in court at 8:00 a.m. tomorrow in a town two hours back the way you came, on a heavily potholed road. You will plead guilty. Then, you will appeal and perhaps have the fine reduced. Or, you can pay the fine to me now, and you can proceed.”
Naively thinking that the options she stated were the only options, I began to plead my case on the spot. “We didn’t see a speed limit sign. Won’t you let us off with a warning? We’ve been in Kenya less than three hours. Can’t we appeal at a court in a town in the direction we are heading, say, Eldoret or Lamu?”
“No, that is not possible,” Susan said.
As I continued to beg for leniency, I said, “We aren’t speeders,” in the same way I would say “We aren’t cannibals.”
“What are you doing in Africa?” Susan asked. “Are you doctors? Missionaries?”
“No,” I said. “We are nothing. We are nobody.” Desperate to come up with something that made us remotely worthwhile I said, “But while in Uganda, we were with a friend who is a doctor.” I thought of Sarah Richardson.
Susan tilted her head and pursed her lips. “Is she like me, or is she mzungu, like you?” she asked.
“She’s mzungu,” I said. “But she is a doctor to Ugandans, and she dates Ugandans, so she’s practically a Ugandan.”
This made Susan laugh.
Then Scott, trying out a course of action we had never discussed or agreed on (not that we had ever discussed any police speed trap protocol), joined Susan and me at my window. He took out his wallet, pulled out a US$100 bill and a US$20, and handed them to Susan. “Here. We’ll just pay the fine and be on our way. This is all the money we have until we visit a bank in Eldoret,” he said.
“What?” both Susan and I exclaimed at once. Susan glanced at the bills and got tears in her eyes.
“Do you mean to say,” Susan said separating the bills and holding them apart on the mounds of her ample chest, “that further up the road, if you step on someone’s egg, you will have no money?”
Having no idea what it meant to “step on someone’s egg,” but sensing possible victory, I locked eyes with Susan. With all the seriousness I could muster, I said quietly, “That is exactly what we mean, Susan.”
Susan sighed dramatically. “What if I make my own decision?” Without waiting for an answer, she handed the US$100 bill back to Scott and pressed the US$20 to her bosom. “I will keep this,” she said and walked away.
“That was half scary, half infuriating,” I said as we drove away. “I can’t believe you handed her one hundred dollars. What about our no-bribe policy? If you had just given me a little more time, I think we could have driven away without paying a dime.”
“Didn’t you realize what was going on?” Scott asked. “We were speeding, that’s true, but she was waiting for us to offer a bribe. She never intended to arrest us or to collect the entire one-hundred-and-twenty dollars.”
“But you gave her that one hundred-dollar bill,” I said.
“I knew she wouldn’t take that hundred. I’ve been trying to get rid of it since we left Cape Town. It was printed in 1995. No one in Africa will take a U.S. bill printed before 1996. Don’t you remember reading that in the guidebook? Even the teller at our bank at home knew that old hundreds weren’t accepted in Africa. Somehow, we ended up with this useless, here anyway, hundred-dollar bill. Susan saw the date on the hundred and knew she would never be able to use it. That’s the reason she gave it back to me.”
I silently studied Scott, seeing him in a new light. “Clever man,” I said.
Speed traps in Kenya were the worst. Most police officers who encountered Ndoto were usually much friendlier.
“This is a one-zero-niney. Very strong. I learned to drive in this vehicle!”
“It’s a 1973 Series III 109,” I’d say to confirm.
“Eish, more than forty years old. But it is STRONG.” Then, “Where do you come from?”
We never knew if they were asking our country or where we spent the previous night. We usually answered incorrectly. But because we drove a car that reminded them of their youth, they smiled and said, “Safari jema. I wish you a good journey. Proceed.”
In Zimbabwe, we were stopped seven times in twenty kilometers. One policeman, after expressing, as they often did, how strong Ndoto looked, said, “I like this car. I want this car. I think I will come in the night when you aren’t looking and take it.”
“Ha!” I said to the officer. “Try not to wake us when you steal it. We sleep on the roof.”
Another looked longingly at Ndoto and whispered, “I want. I dream…”
One time a policeman asked us to engage the backup lights. “Backup lights?” Scott repeated looking over at me in a panic.
Did we even have backup lights?
Thinking fast, Scott said to the policeman, “This car is older than your father. It was made long before backup lights were invented.”
“Proceed,” the policeman said with a smile—perhaps recalling a time his father reminisced about the virtues of Old Landys.
IS THAT YOUR NEST?
Because Scott had made it all the way up to Eagle in Boy Scouts (which was no doubt why he was so thrifty, loyal, and brave. Mostly, thrifty), he wanted to visit the last home of Lord Baden Powell, founder of the Boy Scouts of America.
Powell fell in love with Kenya in 1927 after a visit to Treetops, the lodge made famous by Elizabeth II. Her father, the King, had died when she was staying there. It was said that “she went up to bed at Treetops a princess and came down a queen.”
It was the rugged nature of the area that enticed Powell to live out his days in the town of Nyeri, at the foot of Mt. Kenya, an ideal spot for any man or woman in love with the outdoors. His small cottage was now a museum. The walls were covered in neckerchiefs, sent by scouts from around the world.
The museum visit put Scott in such a good mood, he suggested that we make like royalty and stay at the high-priced Treetops for the night. I vetoed the idea after seeing photos of the updated hotel. It looked nothing like the place a girl would become a queen. Instead, we drove in the direction of Isiolo, the beginning of the Wild West of Kenya. A policeman stopped us at a roadblock near the outskirts of town.
“Do you know where you are going?” he asked.
“Yes,” said Scott.
“Have you been there before?”
“Yes,” I said being honest.
“You must be careful. There are bandits.”
“Uh, yes,” I said swallowing hard.
“Alright. Proceed.”
We’d been on the Marsabit to Moyale road before, when we transited from Cairo to Nairobi with Karl and Mandy. It was a remote, teeth-rattling, corrugated road, but it was the gateway to Ethiopia and Egypt.
I was game to drive the bandit road again. “Cape to Cairo?” I suggested to Scott at the intersection.
But my Land Rover pilot vetoed me with one look. He wasn’t worried about bandits. He didn’t want to subject Ndoto to that horrendous road. Plus, overland fatigue was setting in for all three of us. We’d driven more than twenty thousand bumpy kilometers by then, and the potholes and police stops were wearing us down. It was just as well. I had read about a lodge located in nearby Samburu National Reserve called The Elephant Bedroom, and with inspiration like that I knew we had to stay a night. I called the lodge and booked a safari tent for two nights hence.
We entered the park, placed the binoculars and bird book on the seat between us, and scanned the horizon for wild things. It didn’t take long. There were ostriches, lions with cubs, and elephants practically guiding us to Riverside Camp, our camp for the night. Again, we had the site all to ourselves—except for the troops of pesky monkeys and baboons that took up residence as soon as we’d arrived. We couldn’t leave Ndoto unattended for a second or they would be inside grabbing whatever they could. A slingshot, which we kept handy in the dashboard, was put to good use. We didn’t even have to load it with a projectile. All we had to do was pull back on the rubber and aim to send the monkeys or baboons scrambling.
It had been an extremely hot and humid day, but there were no showers at the campsite. We felt generally sticky, stinky, and tired. More importantly, Ndoto was tired. We had broken yet another leaf spring, probably on the jarring speed bumps in Uganda. Onyango, the attendant who greeted us as we drove into camp, told us he was a mechanic on the side, and that he would be happy to bring his tools the next morning and have a look at Ndoto.
Onyango showed up in the morning with a wrench. It turned out he was more of a talker than a mechanic. He looked at our rooftop tent and the ladder leading to it, and said, “Is that your nest? Don’t you fall out?”
“Never. There are zippers to keep us inside,” I said.
He scratched at his temple.
When we told him that we were from California he said, “Ah, American football. The San Francisco 49ers.”
Eventually, he came to the subject of his daughters. He told us had three daughters and wanted to give one of them, a four-year-old named Merline, to me. It might sound unbelievable that someone would offer a child to a stranger, one who lived in a different country to boot, but it did happen. To Onyango, we represented a chance for his daughter to receive education and opportunity.
“Onyango, I know it’s difficult at times, but it’s best to keep your family together. You would miss your daughter,” I said.
He nodded. I hoped the money we would pay Onyango for fixing Ndoto might help keep his family together.
Even with Scott’s tools, Onyango couldn’t fix the broken spring, but he did adjust the clutch. When he took the front wheels off to inspect the undercarriage, he reported that the steering was “dangerous.” We already knew that. But he convinced us that the required parts needed to make it safe, along with leaf springs, were available in the town of Isiolo.
In the morning, Scott dropped me off at the nearby Elephant Bedroom. I checked us in for the night, and he and Onyango drove to Isiolo to have the repairs done.
“Back shortly,” Scott said, ever the optimist when it came to Ndoto repairs, which is one big reason I love him.
I found out why the lodge was called The Elephant Bedroom when a pair of elephants mated in the river directly in front of our tent. While they mated, the rest of the herd circled around them, trumpeting and splashing with excitement. Elephant Bedroom was inspiring. But where was Scott during all of this commotion? Probably underneath Ndoto.
Inside the luxurious safari tent there was a writing desk, a couch, and two bathrobes made from Masai blankets. Outside the tent was Africa.
I sat in the plunge pool on the private deck and watched an elephant eat fruit off a date palm not twenty feet from where I soaked. It was perfect except for one thing. Scott was in Isiolo with Onyango and Ndoto, instead of in the pool getting pruney with me.
By gin and tonic time, he still wasn’t back. But he sent me a text: “Things that need fixing are being fixed.” He told me to enjoy myself. What a guy.
Later, a Canadian couple in the next tent asked if I would like to join them on their night game drive, but I declined. Why go on a game drive when the elephants came to me? Besides it wouldn’t have been as much fun without Scott.
He finally arrived at six o’clock saying Ndoto had another new set of bushings. This was her third set. We had sundowners (moon risers by that time) in the plunge pool and dressed for a late dinner. By the time we were ready to stroll to the lodge, two male elephants stood directly in the path between the restaurant and us.
A waiting askari guard instantly appeared at the river side of the deck. “I will escort you to the lodge. Because the elephant is in the path, we will need to walk through the bushes along the river. Stay close and right behind me. Make as little noise as possible,” he said.
Situational awareness didn’t have a chance. We were tromping through unfamiliar territory in the dark. With hearts thumping and only one head torch to illuminate the uneven shoreline, we followed our askari two hundred feet to the lodge and made it to dinner with muddy shoes but without getting stomped or chomped.
After we ordered, I asked the waiter if he knew what it meant to step on someone’s egg.
“It’s when you get into some kind of trouble only money can solve. If you stepped on someone’s egg you are causing them some hardship, so you should pay for that. Maybe you drove over someone’s goat, or cow, or sheep. Now the owner would be looking to you to pay for it because you had broken their egg. And maybe it was their last egg.”
“Oh, I get it. Like compensation,” Scott said. “I can see why Susan would be concerned about us if we gave all our cash to her.”
“Did you step on someone’s egg?” the waiter asked with narrowed eyes.
“Not yet, thank goodness. I hope we never do,” I said. One of my greatest fears was that we would hit an animal or person as we drove through Africa.
We stopped back at the repair shop in Isiolo the next morning on the way out of town to have the steering readjusted. The mechanic had made it so tight that even Scott, whose arms had come to resemble The Hulk since he started driving Ndoto, could barely turn the wheel. Plus, while at the garage, we discovered another broken spring.
As mechanics worked on Ndoto, I pulled out the camp chairs and started a conversation with a Kenyan soldier who was reading a newspaper, in the shade next to a building. Ibrahim was friendly and articulate. He told me about himself and shared his life philosophy. “God tells us what to do,” he said. “You just have to listen.”
He told me that his wife had left him and that his sister and his mother were raising his two girls. “My wife left because I don’t earn enough money in the army.” He paused and looked down at his hands. “Divorce is a big problem in Kenya. Women leave the family because the man doesn’t earn enough money. And it doesn’t happen only in the army.” He swallowed before he said, “My wife didn’t understand me.” (Was it a cliché the world over?) Then he asked about our journey and taught me the words safari ndefu, which means “long journey.”
The spring repair in Isiolo gave way one day later in Nanyuki.
When we asked for help in finding a mechanic in Nanyuki, a shopkeeper told us to see a man named Henry. “Find him near the Total petrol station, at the bottom of the road. He’ll be able to fix your spring.”
Henry’s repair shop, was nothing more than a narrow dirt road behind the Total station. While Henry’s mechanics Alen and Joseph replaced the broken leaf spring, I again pulled out our two camp chairs and set up a tête-à-tête with Ndoto’s latest mechanic.
Like Ibrahim, Henry brought up the subject of divorce. “It is a big problem in my country now,” he said. “After the woman divorces her husband, he must pay money to the wife, which he cannot afford.”
Later, I asked him how Kenyans felt about Barack Obama. He hesitated before saying, “Well, you see, we do not care much for him.”
“Really? I’m surprised. Obama’s father was Kenyan. I would have thought that Kenyans would be proud to have had an African descendant as President of the United States.”
“Yes, well, at first we were happy. We didn’t think it was possible that a black man with family ties to Africa could ever be President of America, so when he was elected, yes, we were proud. But you see,” he paused again. “You see, Obama is from the wrong tribe. He is not Kikuyu. He is Luo. In fact, Obama’s own father was against the first president of my country.”
Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya’s first indigenous president, transformed Kenya from a colony of Great Britain to an independent nation. And it was true that Obama Sr.’s conflicts with Kenyatta led to Obama Sr. being blacklisted and unemployed. Kenyans have a long memory. Kenyatta died in 1978. His son Uhuru Kenyatta was the current president.
“With all due respect, I don’t think Barack Obama identifies with any tribe. Isn’t it enough that he is of African descent?” I asked again.
“No. Not to Kikuyus,” he said.
We were visiting more mechanics than national parks lately, but I didn’t mind. If not for Ndoto’s need for yet another spring that day, I might never have known that tribal identity was important, even if you were on the other side of the world. I was beginning to understand that tribalism could be more widespread than racism in Africa. There were more than twenty ethnic groups and tribes in Kenya alone. I could see how conflict among tribes was historic and deeply ingrained.
While I was getting a lesson in tribalism, Scott chatted with Alen and Joseph, who were busy installing the new leaf spring. Scott mentioned our desire for a hand crank, so that we could start Ndoto in case both car batteries gave out at the same time.
When mzungus made their wants known in Africa, people often did their best to help find a solution, and Alen was no different. He put down his tools to take up the hunt for a hand crank. It was ingenuity in action, a trait I witnessed time and again amongst Africans.
“I think I saw one, somewhere,” he said, and off he went to a Land Rover graveyard, no doubt. He returned twenty minutes later with a crank, but it was too short.
“Ah shame. Thanks for trying though,” Scott said before paying Henry and driving out of town to find a place to sleep for the night. Our GPS directed us to Nanyuki River Camp.
We drove through the neglected entrance and down a sandy road to an area that looked like it might once have been a campsite with a palapa. The property had a deserted feeling, a strange vibe, as if no one had stayed there for a really long time. But the sun was going down fast, and we didn’t want to drive around in the dark to find another place to stay. We didn’t drive at night unless we absolutely had to, and we tried to find an established overland camp whenever one was available. There are loads of overland camps located all through Eastern and Southern Africa. Amenities varied, but we could usually look forward to a hot shower and a source of power so we could plug in and charge our batteries. Sometimes, the camps even had a restaurant. If we were really lucky, it came with a view or had a waterhole or a bar where we could meet other travelers. Nanyuki Camp had almost none of these. But it did have something that made up for it.
We had almost finished setting up, when a baby camel appeared. The little camel, with eyes the size of bread plates and lashes that belonged on a debutante, ran right up to me and snuggled into the space between my arm and my body. I can now say with certainty that baby camels have the softest, wispiest fur, bar none. He let me hug him and pet him for a few minutes before he saw something shiny and trotted off down the road. We learned from the man running the camp that the camel had been orphaned and somehow thought Nanyuki Camp was his home.
The newness and downy tufts of the baby camel made me wish we could stay another night at Nanyuki River Camel Camp, but we had a lot of driving ahead of us. So, the next day we were up at dawn. I hoped the camel would come by again for some petting before we left, so I dawdled over coffee and tooth brushing. A sloth could have put our camp chairs away faster than I did.
Finally, Scott said, “Tris, you’ll have to find something else to pet at the next camp. We really need to get going. It’s a long drive to Mombasa.”
On our way out of town, we spotted Alen outside the Total station, smiling and vigorously waving a hand crank at us. We were amazed. How could he have known we would come that way, at that hour?
We pulled up slowly and smiled at Alen.
He approached Ndoto and said, “I’ve been waiting for you to pass by. I have your hand crank.”
And it was just the right size.
PROVIDENCE AND POMEGRANATES—MOMBASA AND LAMU, KENYA
Back in California, we live in a hundred-year-old house on a street named after a Methodist Bishop. Our house was not old by European standards, but for the west coast of California, she stood out as a grand old colonial lady with an interesting history. From time to time over the years, we had visits from some of the previous owners, their children, or grandchildren that had lived there.
In December 2011, we were frantically readying our house for our annual eggnog party. There were usually well over one hundred people in attendance—mostly because Scott made his delicious eggnog from scratch, a process that involved ten dozen eggs, lots of half and half, and a case of Jameson Irish Whiskey. The house was in disarray, especially the kitchen, which looked and smelled like an Irish distillery. The sound of the doorbell was a welcome distraction from the bustling preparations. On the porch was a well-dressed man around our age.
“Hi, I’m Yusuf Giansiracusa. I grew up here. My family owned this home in the sixties. I was wondering if it would be alright if I had a look around.”
The house was a mess. I didn’t know Yusuf, but he wasn’t a complete stranger to me either. My friends and I had played in the front yard with Yusuf and his siblings, when I was a kid.
“Yusuf, I’d love to ask you in but could you perhaps come back in a few days? The house will be much more presentable by then. Please, you are very welcome,” I said hopefully.
“Thank you, but I can’t. I’m on my way to the airport to catch a flight to Saudi Arabia, where I live.”
I quickly thought how disappointed I would be if I wasn’t allowed a chance to see my childhood home just because of a few dust bunnies, egg shells, and spilled whiskey.
“Let’s start with your old room,” I said welcoming Yusuf further into the foyer.
We walked upstairs and all through the house, Yusuf sharing stories of growing up, and Scott and I telling him how much we loved living there.
“It’s like coming home to a great grandmother. It hugs me every time I walk through the front door,” I said.
My best friend, Bonnie Fine, grew up just two blocks away, so I spent lots of my time in the neighborhood as a kid. We were together because of our one joke: Whenever an adult asked us how we were, I would answer “I’m fine.” Then Bonnie would say, “No you’re not. I’m Fine, you’re O’Kane,” after which we would dissolve in laughter.
Yusuf and I were about the same age, so we had some common memories. We talked about the ocelot that had lived at the nearby pink house, and about his family’s orange tumbler that sat on the front lawn.
The round orange tumbler was a steel swing for two, but my childhood memory recalled eight to ten children piling in the tumbler all at one time. I was sure one or more of us barfed or fell off. I probably experienced the thrill of the tumbler only once or twice, but it was something I never forgot. Even thirty years later, I would say to Bonnie, “Remember that orange tumbler thingy in the Giansciracusa’s yard? Wasn’t that the coolest thing ever?”
Yusuf, Scott, and I continued reminiscing our way through the house, saving the kitchen for last. I needn’t have worried that Jameson bottles took up almost every inch of countertop, or that there was powdered sugar and egg whites making a gooey mess on the floor because Yusuf had his eyes on our fridge. Not for what was inside (frozen pizza and eggnog makings), but because our refrigerator doors were covered, top to bottom, with photos of our years in Africa. “Ah, I see you have le mal d’Afrique as well, the African bug,” he said with a warm smile.
“Oh boy, do we ever.” My party preparation tiredness vanished while I described our past and future trips to Africa with manic joy. “We just bought an old Land Rover in Cape Town. We plan to drive her through Southern and Eastern Africa and up to Sudan.”
Yusuf smiled and looked at his watch. “I’d really love to hear more, but I have to leave now to catch my flight.”
In the entryway Yusuf said, “I’m really glad I stopped in today. I loved growing up in this house, and it makes me feel good to see how much pleasure you get out of it too.” He paused. “When do you think you might be in Kenya? I would like to invite you to be guests in my homes when you get there.”
“Homes? In Kenya?”
“Yes, one in Mombasa and one on Lamu Island. My home on Lamu is staffed year-round, so, really, you can come anytime.” He took out his phone to show us photos of, not a house, but a petite palace. “Seven years ago, I restored the house in Lamu and furnished it with things you would expect to see in a traditional Swahili home. These would be your quarters,” he said, swiping his phone to a photo of a bedroom and sitting room decorated with traditional Swahili furniture, including a four-poster bed and armoire. Other photos showed elaborately carved doors, gallery walls made up of stucco niches, museum quality Zanzibar chairs, and an open-air staircase leading up four flights to a rooftop terrace that had a daybed shaded by a vibrant pink bougainvillea. Trying to act as if invitations to palaces were everyday events, I asked, “Um, how did you come to own two homes in Kenya?”
“I married an Omani girl who comes from a prominent family in Lamu. We met when I was studying in London.”
Scott, an African history buff, knew something about the Swahili Coast and Lamu, so he was able to ask savvy questions about the island and its architecture. He later told me that captains of dhow boats and merchants had come to Lamu to trade from all over the world. For a small island, it had lots of visitors throughout history. First the Somalis, Chinese, Indonesians, Persians, and Omanis came, followed later by Turks, Portuguese, British and Germans. They brought silk from China, spices from Indonesia, and cotton from India in exchange for ivory, wood, skins, and incense.
We said goodbye and promised to keep in touch. Scott and I walked back to the kitchen to check on the fermenting egg yolks. I looked at our fridge with new eyes. It seemed that serendipity had struck again.
“Wow. What if we hadn’t been home? What if I had never put all those photos of Africa on our fridge?” While Scott prepared another batch of nog, we talked about our plans for Africa and our opportunity to see Lamu.
When Bonnie arrived at the eggnog party, I told her about Yusuf’s visit and his invitation to Lamu. “I wonder what ever happened to that orange tumbler thingy,” she said.
Now, over a year later, we were finally arriving in Mombasa, at the first of Yusuf’s Kenyan homes.
Salim and Siad, the house staff, welcomed us into an elegant, two-story, Arabic/Mediterranean-style home, as if we were royalty. We were given a tour of the kitchen, gym, and living areas.
“Tris. Look,” Scott said pointing at a bookcase filled with titles that had us drooling. Yusuf had told us that his homes were designed for respite and reading. That was just what we needed after nine months on the road in Africa.
“Are you fine?” Salim asked when the tour stalled out at the library.
“We are very fine,” Scott said selecting another book out of the cupboard.
With two small stacks of books in our arms, we settled on the patio off the living room. Salim brought a pitcher of homemade juice made from lemons picked off a tree in the garden. Siad asked if we had any laundry that needed attention. Then, we were left alone with our books and contentment.
“I feel so relaxed,” I said with a happy sigh looking out to the garden. “Are those pomegranate trees?” I asked Scott, but he was already too deep into Longitudes by Dava Sobel to answer.
“I’m going to email Yusuf to thank him for his hospitality and to ask about those trees. I’m pretty sure they are pomegranates. We had a lot of them growing up in the neighborhood.”
Yusuf emailed back almost immediately. He had planted the trees in memory of all the pomegranates he had gathered from the trees at the ocelot house as a kid. I too, had taken pomegranates off those trees. What followed were emails back and forth, recalling all the pomegranates and stained shirts of our childhoods.
The following day, Salim accompanied us to Lamu Island, where we would stay at Yusuf’s other Kenyan home. Gargantuan potholes and numerous police checks slowed us down considerably so we had plenty of time to look around as we drove.
Because Ndoto stood out in a crowd, people waved at her from afar, even from a passing public bus.
“Remember us?” a man shouted out his bus window. “We’re headed to Lamu!”
“Scott, look! It’s the couple we met at Nile River Explorers, Matt and Lissie.” In the bus, they would surely beat us to Lamu. For us, it was eight hours before Lamu was in sight and the three of us, squished together in the front seat, were tired.
At the port across from Lamu, everything went like clockwork. We parked in the secure lot recommended by Yusuf, boarded a waiting speedboat, and arrived on Lamu Island by 5:00 p.m. Single-mast wooden boats with lateen sails crowded the pier.
Historically, dhows were used in the Indian Ocean to transport trade goods or used for pearl diving. Once a year, in Lamu, dhow captains enter their boats in a popular race, and we were lucky to arrive in time to see the finish of a practice round.
Walking through Lamu was like walking through an ancient maze. All the buildings were different heights, but attached. The only way to tell the houses apart was by a change of paint color. Even then, most of the houses were painted shades of ivory or white.
We followed Salim through the narrow alleyways, dodging cats and donkeys, to a magnificent mahogany door, the entrance to Yusuf’s Swahili home. The front door was opened by Jamal, the year-round caretaker.
“Welcome to Bandar Abbas,” he said.
We stepped into a Swahili home restored with exquisite attention to detail. There were dozens of niches or galleries carved into a wall that faced Mecca. Marble floors and museum-quality furnishings gleamed throughout. Yusuf’s beloved pomegranate trees were to be found in Lamu as well. Six trees grew in the courtyard of an adjacent building that housed a cistern.
A series of open-air stairwells led to a rooftop utopia with a fan-cooled daybed shaded by bougainvillea. The daybed itself was covered in the finest Kashmiri wool.
Our quarters were as Yusuf had shown us on his phone, only more impressive in person. The water in the shower was mercifully cool, as was the iced lemonade Salim provided around the clock.
Downstairs, we were acquainted with another fine library of books, including a guide book to Lamu. Serendipity, or just dumb luck, was almost too good to be true at this point because the dhow race we had witnessed upon arrival, was just one of the many events happening in Lamu that week.
We had arrived during Maulidi, a festival held every year during the last week of the month of the Prophet’s birth. Pilgrims from Kenya, Sudan, Congo, Uganda, Zanzibar, and Tanzania descended on the tiny island of Lamu to sing the praises of Mohammad. The parades of men and boys clad in white, singing and dancing through the streets was mesmerizing, but there was also much anticipation for the upcoming donkey races and the final dhow race.
The best way to explore Lamu is to wander on foot in any direction. We found small shops stocked with necessary items and women sitting on stoops selling onions or carrots. Off-duty donkeys (those not pulling carts) roamed the alleys in pairs drinking from the culverts that ran alongside the footpaths and down to the remarkably clean sea. Men gathered in the main square to read newspapers and smoke cigarettes. Most people were dressed in the traditional Swahili or Muslim style—head to toe black robes called buibui for the ladies and ankle length caftans and a taqiyah (skullcap), for the men. The vibe, at the time we were there, was peaceful and the pace was slow.
There was something else in the air on Lamu. Dozens of perfumed women, fully covered in the Muslim style, walked the alleyways in the evenings with studied poise, almost like models on a runway. Their eyes, which was all I could see of their physique, were heavily lined. The women were exotic and appealing. I mentioned this to Scott, but he looked at me as if I were imagining things.
One of the things I most love about traveling the world, is the unexpected re-meeting of strangers who’d become friends. We emailed Matt and caught up with him and Lissie at a café. Together, we watched a procession of hundreds of men and boys, all clad in bright white caftans and hats, singing and drumming all along the seafront. The littlest boys where perched on the shoulders of their fathers or uncles. We stood on benches to get a better view of the parade and watched until the last man disappeared from sight.
“I can’t believe we are this lucky to be here during Maulidi. Let’s make a plan to see the donkey race in the morning,” Scott said.
The donkey races were no laughing matter. Since spectators share the same space in the street as the donkeys, in the style of the Running of the Bulls in Pamplona, we were hard pressed to find a safe place to stand. We pushed our way to the starting line where donkey jockeys shouted at one another while trying to control the long-eared beasts between their legs. There wasn’t a starting gate or even a rope or ribbon designating a starting line. There was controlled chaos. The crush of spectators bracketed a line of fourteen or so donkeys like bookends. Briefly, I was pinned against the leg of a jockey in a line of jumpy, hard to control donkeys. Suddenly, the race began. Every donkey bolted off the line at the same time. I was nearly bowled over by two contestants vying for the same patch of ground. The race along the waterfront was over quickly. We ran to the finish line and watched a brief physical protest break out when the results were announced.
“That was hectic. Great to experience, but frenetic and dangerous,” said Matt. “Is everyone okay?”
“Yeah. But I think I got slimed,” I said pointing at what looked like donkey drool on my skirt.
“Eww. Me too,” said Lissie wiping her shirt with a tissue. “Let’s find a little less crowded way to watch the dhow race this afternoon. The wind is coming up, so that race should be a fast one too.”
Salim helped us charter a dhow, so we could follow the race up close and away from the crush of people on land. Ten minutes before the start of the race, we boarded a large old wooden dhow with a white lateen sail. As soon as we cast off, a strong wind carried us into the channel where we tacked upwind and down waiting for the starting gun to fire. The regatta starting line was as disorderly as the one for the donkey race. But there was slightly less shouting and all the boats managed to initiate at once. Our dhow was suddenly in the middle of the action. One dhow heeled over too far and dumped the entire crew into the water before capsizing. They soon righted the dhow and tried in vain to catch up to the other boats. We rescued a crewmember from a different boat when his team members failed to turn around and pick him up after he fell overboard. Another boat capsized and another was blown into a snarl of mangrove trees. By the time the boats rounded the final buoy, only three were left in the race. We shouted our congratulations to the crew of the winning boat, which won by a boat length.
When we arrived back at the dock, I smiled at Scott and said, “I don’t think I could have imagined this day if I tried. Sailing off the coast of Kenya in a traditional dhow after watching a parade and a donkey race is more than I could have dreamed. Thanks for loving this as much as I do.”
Scott, blond hair tousled by the wind and sea spray, grinned down at me and gave me a quick hug. Public displays of affection were frowned on in Lamu.
“It was fun,” he said. “It’s nice being back on the water.” We had bought and sailed a catamaran from California to Hawaii in 1983. And that was twenty-one days on the ocean, not a few hours. Even more fun.
“Yeah, I thought about that too,” I said still smiling.
Matt and Lissie left the next morning. The rest of our time at Bandar Abbas was spent doing what Yusuf said Lamu was best for—respite and reading. We did this mostly on the daybed of the rooftop deck. We even slept there at night. Salim cooked fresh fish for us and kept us hydrated with freshly squeezed lemonade.
Our final day on Lamu was spent at nearby Shela Beach, where I had my hair cut. Beatrice assured me that she would do a good job on my hair because she had watched a video on the Internet that showed how to cut mzungu hair.
No one has a better pulse on a community than a hairstylist, so I asked Beatrice about the intriguing women walking unaccompanied at night through the square. “They come to Lamu for the Maulidi Festival,” she said. “But not to honor Muhammad necessarily. They are looking for a husband—or a fling. There are many wealthy men here during the festival, you know.”
“No, I didn’t know.”
Beatrice was a liberated woman. “Anyway, I don’t like African men,” she said. “My last boyfriend was Italian. Never. Again. French men are arrogant. So are Americans. I was with a Dutch guy until he recently cheated on me.”
Aside from my encounter with thoroughly modern Beatrice, being on Lamu was like stepping back in time. There were no cars. A few of the alleyways were so narrow that Scott’s broad shoulders sometimes touched the sides of the buildings. Speakers from twenty-eight mosques sang the call to prayer throughout the day and began again before dawn. I missed the sound of the one nearest Yusuf’s house because it was the most melodious.
The circumstances that brought Yusuf to us and us to Lamu, were nothing short of serendipitous. The home Yusuf grew up in, that hugs me every day when I walk through the door, and our mutual appreciation for pomegranates and orange round tumblers will, I hope, long endure.
RAISING THE ROOF WITH EVE JACKSON
Being back in Tanzania was bittersweet. We were well and truly on our way back to South Africa now. Ndoto handled like a horse headed back to the barn, more than ever.
Months earlier, when Scott was reading everything he could get his hands on about flying, we came across an e-book written by Eve Jackson, the first person to fly solo in a microlight from England to Australia. Her book Gertie’s Day Out recalled the time she flew her plane, Gertie, from England to Tanzania, a flight that included an unscheduled landing and seizure of her plane in Sudan.
Scott read Eve’s book aloud to me in our rooftop tent at night. Her narrative was entertaining, enlightening, and exciting—all the “e’s” that made a story about flying so alluring.
We sent an email to her publisher asking for Eve’s contact details, to tell her how much we enjoyed her story. We also told her about Ndoto.
The publisher wrote back, assuring us that she would pass our comments on, but that we shouldn’t expect to hear back from the author directly.
The very next day, we received an email from Eve saying that she too owned and explored Africa in an old Series Land Rover. She asked us to visit her when we came to Dar es Salaam. At the end of the email was a tip from Eve: “Have fun and take every side trip. Most likely you will not be passing that way again.”
A few days later, we drove into Dar es Salaam on Old Bagamoyo Road. When we met Eve outside the domestic terminal of Coastal Air where she worked, we had an instant connection. We had a love of Africa, Land Rovers, and flying in common already, and it turned out that we all liked beer too. Eve invited us to camp in her garden. She also invited us to attend a party the next day in celebration of the completion of the roof on the new home she was building on her property to replace her studio cottage.
That night, we went out to a fancy restaurant for a rich meal, which turned out to be a mistake because my stomach wasn’t used to it. I spent most of the next day, the day of the roof party, barfing in Eve’s nice bathroom. I was a mess. I made a dozen trips through the kitchen, past Eve’s bed, and into her bathroom, which had only a sheet as a door.
Eve was compassionate and understanding. “Scott, let’s go shopping,” she said.
She and Scott left to buy libations for the party, while I continued to exorcise my food demon. By 5:00 p.m., I was no less embarrassed, but my guts were much better. I stuck to ice tea at first, but as more of Eve’s guests arrived and the atmosphere became too festive to resist, I switched to champagne. I convinced myself that the bubbles would help settle my stomach once and for all. Either it worked, or I didn’t remember it not working because I had a really good time. We watched the sun set from atop the new roof with Eve’s friends, and we ate family style at a long table built out of two-by-fours and plywood.
When we said our farewells in the morning, I said to Eve, “We’ll see you again, I hope.”
A few days later, Eve emailed us another tip, which was excellent advice about avoiding the excessive fine for arriving to a Kruger Park rest camp after sunset.
Carry a broken fan belt, and show it as an excuse in case you are late into camp. It seems to work, and it’ll give you a couple extra hours in the park.
As luck would have it, we already had a broken fan belt on board.
We also had an email from Ibrahim, the soldier we had met in Isiolo:
I hope you are fine and in good health and that you and your husband are still enjoying your safari ndefu. I wish you God’s protection and care, and may He always be your guide and make ways for you and your husband. I hope by now you have driven a great distance, probably beyond East Africa. Wishing you and Mr. Scott a lovely time. Ibrahim.
It’s friends that build the world.
AFRICA FINALLY KICKS MY ASS
Continuing south we entered Malawi, which was known mostly for her 365-kilometer-long and fifty-two-kilometer-wide “calendar lake.”
Malawi was an itinerary buster. We spent an entire month camped on pristine beaches along her crystal-clear lake. Unmarked roads led to spectacular beaches, so we tried them all. Our route was like that of a serpent, winding its way from tar road to beach camp and back, all along the lake. The vibe was mellow. The scenery was unspoiled. The camps were basic, providing a place to park on or near the sand usually with a restaurant and bar in sight. The Livingstone Mountains that rose sharply up from the shore, reminded me of the Napali Coast in Hawaii. And across the water were the breathtaking Rift Mountains of Mozambique.
The roads were among the best we had seen—few potholes, fewer vehicles, and no spring-busting speed bumps like there were in Uganda. Even the road up the escarpment to Livingstonia, a small mountain town founded by missionaries from Scotland around 1900 and dubbed by our guidebook “The most exciting road in Africa” for its twenty precariously-carved switchbacks, was better maintained than some roads in Uganda or Kenya. That’s not to say the road to Livingstonia wasn’t terribly exciting. It was white-knuckle worthy. On the way down, after Scott had to back up three times just to make a turn on the steep road, I got out and walked the rest of the way, ten kilometers.
We’d been in Africa more than twelve months before we crossed the border into Malawi. Malawi was remarkable. A woman held the highest office, and the police were friendlier. The children appeared happy and healthy. There seemed to be better food security and almost everyone had shoes. Billboards proudly proclaimed vast areas “Open Defecation Free” (meaning: don’t poo in the woods, use a latrine), and others demanded the end to child trafficking. Malawi seemed like a country that was doing the right things. That, and the white sand beaches, made us want to stay longer, so we extended our 30-day visas.
Shortly after we extended our visas, the relentless monsoon began in full force. With daily downpours of rain, it suddenly wasn’t hard to leave the Malawi’s pristine beaches. A nasty side effect of the monsoon rains were ant invasions. I don’t mean a few dozen. Literally, hundreds of ants sought refuge in Ndoto and even in our tent to escape their flooded subterranean homes.
Each morning, we shot a blast of DOOM, a powerful insecticide, into Ndoto’s insides and went for a walk. When we returned, we swept out the carcasses that now resembled coffee grinds.
With the rains in full force, the rest of Southern Africa was calling, especially the parts where I wouldn’t have to share my house with eight-legged critters.
Driving out the gates of our final beach camp in Malawi, we met some overlanders coming in. We stopped to compare notes—where have you come from? Where are you going? And, please, tell me it isn’t raining there.
Kirsty and Gareth were a year into an expedition that would take them from Australia to London, in a 1989 Toyota Land Cruiser. Their Land Cruiser, “Troopy,” wasn’t as old as our Ndoto, but it was just as charming.
We shared more in common than 4 X 4 vehicles and wanderlust. Kirsty and I discovered we would both be having a birthday the next day—though Kirsty was turning thirty, and I was turning lots more than thirty, almost twice her age. We hugged. We cried. We were home sick. We compared birthday plans and agreed we were both traveling with keepers. Gareth and Kirsty would be at the luxurious Palamina Lodge. Scott had reserved a bungalow on Lake Malawi’s southern shore at Norman Carr Cottage, the former home of the walking safari legend of the same name.
For three days, I enjoyed five-star birthday treatment at Norman Carr’s Cottage. We swam, we read, we went for boat rides, and we had sundowners and dinners served to us on the beach.
Most of our diet while we overlanded Africa was simple and mostly vegetarian. All the rich meals around my birthday must have been too much for my system again because the day we left Norman Carr for Mozambique, I was horribly ill. It was a trip to the hospital kind of ill. Instead of going to Mozambique, we found a place to stay five steps from a toilet, at Fisherman’s Camp, not far from the hospital in Lilongwe. Africa was officially kicking my ass.
The camp was closed for the season, but when the owner saw the state I was in he gave us a key to the kitchen, which we didn’t need, and one to the bathroom which was desperately needed, and told us we could stay until I was done with my course of antibiotics and well, however long that would be. When I hadn’t eaten anything for three days and wasn’t getting any better, we briefly considered leaving Ndoto at Fisherman’s Camp and flying to Australia for recuperation and relatives. That’s how sick I was.
After a week, ten pounds lighter, and marginally human again and with one last unproductive (thank you, God) visit to the loo, we drove into town to acquire visas for Mozambique. But a sign on the door said the consulate was closed for three days in honor of Women’s Day, a day originally meant to highlight maternal and neonatal mortality in Africa. Now it had become a day to honor all women who carried Africa on their backs.
“Arrgh! Foiled again by an African Holiday,” I tried to say, but it came out sounding more like, ho hum. “And doesn’t Women’s Day imply a twenty-four-hour closure?”
We didn’t want to wait. Besides, I was tired of feeling poorly in the same place, so we opted to cross the border that day into Zambia. Going back to familiar and “easy” Zambia seemed a good way to move on and recuperate.
UNDER THE MANGO TREE
Zambia’s charms started at her small border.
“Where should we pay the road tax?” I asked the official at customs and immigration.
“See the man under the mango tree.”
We looked across the road from the Customs Office. Seated under an enormous mango tree at a small wooden table, was a lone man wearing sunglasses, shirt and tie, and pants with a razor-sharp crease from probably over a hundred ironings. On his table was one pen, a receipt book, and a stamp pad that held a meager amount of ink.
“I like your office,” I said, after we exchanged greetings. “I bet you never get hot under all this shade.”
He smiled. “Yes, I like my office. I can sit under the tree and watch all the people, like you, coming into Zambia. Sometimes I say to myself, ‘why are they here?’”
There were too many responses to that question. Since I had just been seriously ill, I could have said, “Sometimes I wonder too.” Or, I could have rattled off the dozens of reasons why we had come to Africa, especially Zambia. But as nice as it was under the mango tree, I didn’t want to linger, so I said with a smile, “Because this is where the Luangwa River lives.”
When receiving a gift or even a business card in Africa, it is polite to accept it with both hands, as if receiving an offering. No matter what the gift, even if it is lightweight such as a headscarf or biscuit, it is polite to act as if the gift is heavy. For people who often have so little, a gift is significant and important. Accepting the gift with both hands is a sign of respect; that you are giving full attention to the gift and to the giver.
I handed over the money for the road tax (approximately six American dollars) in the customary way. My giving hand presented the fee, while my other hand held up the arm of my giving hand below the elbow. It’s the same when taking change. The man under the mango tree smiled appreciatively.
Fifteen minutes after leaving the border post, we arrived in the town of Chipata, where there was a decent supermarket. We stocked up on tonic, gin, rice, and bananas, all good for what ailed me.
When we arrived at South Luangwa, I said to Scott, “Do you realize we got here without a single broken car part, bruise, or speck of dust?”
“Yeah. Didn’t you notice? The potholed, organ-busting dirt road from Chipata to Mfuwe that we were used to, has just been completely paved.”
I felt instantly better.
Everything around us was green and lush. Bright, white fluffy clouds made for dramatic photos. It wasn’t too hot. Nature was my healer.
I was grateful for the access to medical care in busy Lilongwe in Malawi, but now that we were back in nature on the Luangwa River, with nothing around us but elephants, my guts felt better by the minute.
“This was all I needed,” I said to Scott.
In the morning, I once again found the Adirondack chair on the bank of the river and watched the sunrise turn the colors of the opposite bank from glowing orange, to the color of diluted hot chocolate. Gratitude again washed over me in bucketloads. In the same way Sedona Arizona is a center of spirituality or harmony for some, South Luangwa is a center of gratitude for me, especially if there’s a big bull elephant by my side. It’s the place I feel most appreciative for all the moments that make up my life.
That day, sitting in the Adirondack chair watching elephants move slowly across the shallow river, hoping one would saunter up to me like that first time at Flat Dogs, I felt content and happy. Well. Alive. I was committed to making the most of this short story called life.
It was a powerful feeling. I wondered if the people I loved most (my family), would feel the same if they were here too. I hoped they would. If they saw lions sleeping the afternoon away, or spotted a leopard draped over a tree limb with a full belly, or discovered a chameleon clinging to a leaf, I thought they would. If my niece Clare could see a rhino before they were all gone and my nephew Colin could watch cheetahs (his favorite animal) running full speed and free across the plain, I knew they would. They would love it when hippos came at night when we sat around the campfire—chomp, chomp, chomp, closer and closer—until the night watchman would shine his torch in the hippos’ eyes encouraging them to dine further down the bank. I was sure they would feel the same.
TOO MANY RULES
There is no time of day more inspiring for me than South Luangwa at sundown.
Drinks in hand, Scott and I sat on our camp chairs watching herds of elephants cross the river with babies in tow. Behind us, starlings flashed their iridescent wings and made gargling sounds in their throats while hornbills with their characteristic flight pattern and flapping glide, landed and hopped around on a termite mound nearby. It was a lot of nature for one happy hour, and it was all around us. It was the best kind of nature. Quiet. Not the kind of nature that happened when baboons fought or vervet monkeys screamed. This quiet nature gave us space to think and dream.
Scott handed me a second gin and tonic and said, “I figure we have about two months left in Africa. Let’s talk about how we want to spend the time. It won’t be a big bucket list. More like a list that would fit into a kid’s beach pail.”
“Okay, you go first,” I said squeezing my lime and taking a sip.
“Well, I’d like to do a bit more flying.”
That meant returning to South Africa, which represented putting Ndoto in storage and flying home, and I wasn’t ready for that yet.
“Okay, but we don’t have to go there right away, do we? I mean, we still want to see Mozambique. And how about Namibia? A trip back to Zimbabwe would be great too before returning to South Africa,” I said with my anything’s possible voice that I knew Scott found exhausting at times. “And as Eve said, we may never pass this way again, so I want to do it all and fly with you. Mostly, I want to spend as much time in the bush with elephants as I can. I want to avoid cities and villages as much as possible. More frolicking elephants, less Bujumbura or Kigali. Less suffering.”
Because we had Ndoto, we experienced more of the untouristed, unphotographed, “real” parts of Africa. Other than a few times, we weren’t staying in luxury safari lodges or being driven around in a game viewer before being fed Instagram-worthy meals, as life on a package safari is, not that there was anything wrong with that. Ndoto took us into areas where the average traveler wouldn’t normally go, to see things tourists didn’t normally see, like the poverty in Burundi, for one.
It was sheer luck that I was born an optimist, and I am grateful for it. I wake up every morning with positive thinking. Even simple things like starting the day off with a pair of leopard spot or zebra striped undies from my dresser drawer makes me smile. I have an inherent belief that life is good and that if somehow it isn’t, it will get better soon. But because Ndoto had taken us behind the package safari veil, I sometimes thought I’d seen too much to remain optimistic, at least about the future of Africa. Some days, I ended up covering my face and crying for the unfairness of it all.
I felt bad admitting it, even to myself, but I was beginning to feel hopelessness—a new and upsetting emotion for me. It seemed that the challenges and struggles faced by many Africans would never end—that things wouldn’t get better.
There’s an African saying that women carry Africa on their backs. It starts for them at a young age. Five-year-old girls carry heavy loads of wood or water on their heads or backs. When they are older, they tie their babies to their backs and heft a basket of potatoes or a bucket of water to their heads. From dawn to dusk, it seems they are in constant motion.
Most men and boys aren’t without hardship either. They maneuver impossibly huge piles of charcoal, or wood, or bricks on bicycles. They aren’t riding the bikes. They’re pushing the heavily laden bikes for hours, with all their might while sweat pours off their bodies. Starving dogs stray into oncoming traffic. Feeble oxen and donkeys are sometimes beaten to keep moving. Malaria, HIV, drought, famine—the list was endless. “Too much hardship,” I bemoaned regularly.
“Yes, there is hardship here. I’ve always seen it. But until this trip, until Ndoto, you saw Africa through rose-colored glasses,” Scott said in a pragmatic tone. “It’s your nature to find the good in everything, and I love that about you. But you’ve been worn down by some of the places we’ve been and things we’ve seen.” He grew quiet for a moment. “Some things just aren’t fixable, Tris.”
I could tell he was in an exasperated mood. We rarely argue when we travel. It doesn’t make sense to us to have an argument about anything, when we are living our dreams. It would seem self-indulgent and silly. Overlanding in Africa presented special challenges almost every day, and we understood that, unless we worked as a team, we might fail at our goals or worse.
We’d been on the road almost a year. We had already driven as far north as we could on this trip, so Scott felt we had achieved what we set out to do. I could tell he was tired and ready to move on to the next adventure. I was sure that some days he would prefer flying alone over Greater Kruger to dodging potholes or keeping track of what had jiggled off Ndoto. Maybe most days, lately.
“Cut me where I bleed why don’t you,” I said dramatically. I kind of wanted him to chuckle and get over it, so we could go back to sipping our sundowners in peace. But that didn’t happen.
“C’mon, Tris. Admit it. You talk about Africa’s hardship almost every day now,” Scott paused and shook his head. “In fact, there are five or six phrases that you say almost every day. And, you have too many rules.”
“Rules? Me? Like what?”
“Like, ‘Don’t park under that tree. Snakes might drop down and slither into the car.’ Or, ‘Don’t park there, there might be snakes hiding in the tall grass.’ Then, when you head for a shower you say, ‘If I’m not back in fifteen minutes, come looking for me. I might be snake-bit.’ When we’re driving you say, ‘Look out for that snake, or child, or goat, or chicken, or pothole, or speed bump, or ditch,’ or whatever could be in the road. And you’re always exclaiming, ‘What’s that smell?’”
“Oh yeah? Well, you repeat yourself, too, ya know. Right after I ask camp staff if there are snakes around, you always ask if there is a power point available. Two or three times a day, when we are driving, you ask me if the red key below my seat, the one that charges the extra battery, is on. Then, when we get to camp, you say, ‘Let’s charge up the batteries for the headlamps, or camera, or spotlight,’ or whatever, like you’ve been looking forward to it all day. You exhaust me with your charging talk. And, oh my God, don’t ever ask you to cut hair.”
I let a few minutes pass in silence.
“Scott,” I said with a sigh, “I’m sorry I have so many rules about snakes, but you know they really freak me out.” I went quiet again and thought about other things. I changed my griping to gratitude. I mean, how many women could turn their husband on just by asking him to charge her camera batteries? “Well, there are two things you say every day that I really do appreciate,” I said with a smile and an olive branch.
“What’s that?”
“How about a sundowner.”
“You said two things. What’s the other?” he asked with the makings of a grin.
“I’ll drive.”
TAKE THE GOAT, LEAVE THE CANNOLI
We were in the twelfth month of our journey through Africa. By the time we reentered Zimbabwe, we had been through ten countries and driven more than thirty-eight thousand kilometers. It had already been the journey of a lifetime. Unforgettable, and eye-opening.
I found myself thinking about all the things I would miss when we had to leave, like afternoon clouds that puffed up like slowly-roasted marshmallows, sunsets that made time stand still, and lyrical chatter. All over Africa, wherever two or more people were gathered, there was constant conversation, punctuated by laughter.
I would miss the Big Five, the little five, the ugly five, the beautiful five, the green five, the slimy five, and the high five (giraffe and their kin). I’d miss thatch roofs—new ones, before the spiders, lizards, and snakes had moved in. I would even miss showering with frogs and bush babies. But what I would miss most was the people. When Africans accepted a lift from us, we were awarded a brief glimpse into their lives and an appreciation of joy, despite hardship, that was doled out regularly in Africa. I would miss the children especially, their boundless curiosity and eagerness to laugh and dream big.
But I would also miss people like Li, a meat loving anti-poaching policeman we had met on a hot afternoon when he turned down our offer of a lift.
“I’ll wait for another vehicle,” he said at the control gate next to the Mana Pools Headquarters in Zimbabwe, after peering inside and confirming that Ndoto lacked air conditioning.
“Hrmph. Suit yourself,” I said after we pulled away.
Four days later, we encountered Li again near our camp along the river inside Mana Pools. “Are you leaving today? I would like a lift,” he had said.
“Yes, you’re in luck. We’re leaving now actually.”
“Can you wait five minutes? I want to get my things.” His things had turned out to be a small sack of dried meat.
A cow is meat. A goat is meat. “Meat is meat,” Africans would say. Most Africans didn’t get a chance to eat meat often, but when they did, it was savored. He said dried meat in the same way I would say dark chocolate or someone from Europe would say a thousand Euros.
It was a bit squished for four hours with three adults and an AK-47 in the front seat, but for the first time in Africa, we were waved through every police checkpoint along the way.
Police never stopped my grandfather when he delivered beer to San Francisco speakeasies during prohibition, either. Why? Nuns. “Would you be needing a ride now, Sister?” he would ask in his thick Irish brogue, and off they would go, waved through all police checkpoints along the way.
“I wish you could come with us all the way to South Africa,” I said to Li, enjoying the benefits of driving with an AK-47-toting policeman for the first time in my life.
When we stopped in a town to gas up, I bought a bunch of bananas with the help of Li, who clued me in that the local price was just pennies apiece. I offered him one.
“No. I’m okay,” he said after a slight pause.
“Would you rather have some juice?” I asked.
“No, no. I’m okay.” Then quietly, so that the banana lady couldn’t hear him, he said, “Police are not allowed to eat in public.”
“Really? Oh. Sorry, I didn’t know,” I said, feeling like an entrapper.
When we were a kilometer from town, Li said, “I’ll have that banana now.” As he ate, I noticed how thin he was, so I offered him another, which he gladly accepted.
I asked Li about his frustrating work as an anti-poaching soldier.
“Men will always kill for food, if they need to,” he said.
I asked the names of his wife and his four children and if his parents were still living. Eventually, I worked my way to burning questions about stepping on someone’s egg. Driving through Africa could be stressful, not only for the chassis-busting potholes and time-consuming police checks, but also for the number of humans and animals on the road. I fretted about hitting a cow or dog every time we got behind the wheel.
“Li, if we were to hit a dog or a goat, what should we do? I mean, should we drive to the nearest police station to report it?”
“No, you don’t have to do anything,” Li said quickly. “The owner is responsible. The animal must be on a lead at all times. If you report it, the owner will run away. Believe me, it is he who will be in trouble.”
I needed clarification. This was serious. “So, we just leave the dead dog or goat there and carry on? We don’t report to the police station?”
Li was quiet for a moment. Then, in the exact way the character Clemenza in The Godfather delivered his line “Leave the gun. Take the Cannoli” Li said, “Yes, come to the police station. But leave the dog. Bring the goat.”
FLYING
When Scott wasn’t flying, he was thinking about flying. When he wasn’t thinking about flying, he was asleep, dreaming about flying.
As he piloted Ndoto through Africa, I could tell he was imagining himself in a cockpit of a light sport aircraft flying “low and slow”, as he liked to say, over the African savannah. Sometimes, he would suddenly announce, “I could land here if I had to” when we drove by a level field, or on a long, straight, mostly pothole-free road. He worried about losing the skills he had gained flying with his instructor, Bruce, so he was anxious to get back behind the stick.
When we left South Africa months earlier, Scott’s pilot license in hand, we naively thought we could find airplanes to rent at airfields all over Africa. It wasn’t like that at all. We visited almost every airfield on our route to find them deserted and derelict. In Malawi, Scott mentioned his frustration about not finding planes to fly or fields to land on to the owner of Fisherman’s camp who had been a pilot himself in the 1960s.
“Your timing is a little off, Scott. In the old days, almost every farmer knew how to fly a plane. Roads were few and far between, so people flew everywhere. Now, there are roads all over Africa. They’re not always in great shape, but that’s how folks get around now.”
Thinking about our pail list of things we wanted to accomplish before leaving Africa, specifically flying, we decided the easiest thing would be for us to return to South Africa, where Scott was licensed and had access to the very planes he had trained in. We crossed the Zim border and returned to Hoedspruit. Mozambique and Namibia would have to wait.
Once again, we rented a place to stay, this time at Raptors Lodge, even closer to the airfield. Scott flew for the first time in eight months. He was instantly more relaxed and happier and came home saying he was, “back in the groove.” The next day, he was able to join another pilot on an anti-poaching flight over Greater Kruger. He felt privileged to take part in such an uncommon opportunity. I thought about how much he loved flying and wondered if the dead, dehorned rhino they saw from the air would dim his rosy outlook about flying in Africa. It did, a bit. All travel and exploration change a person, but Africa could affect your heart more than other places.
While Scott flew as much as he could, I became a resident of Hoedspruit again. I shopped, ate, and communed with the locals. I missed sleeping in Ndoto, who sat parked outside our unit, like a regular old car. Of course, we drove her around when needed, but it was all on tar roads. Ndoto was built for luff roads and bushcamps, not paved roads and stop lights. Still, being in Hoedspruit felt like a respite, like a vacation from travel. It was easy. Sociable. Not dusty. And I took full advantage of the home-away-from-home feel of it.
I reconnected with Lisl, who graciously invited me to join her writers’ group for an evening of wine and readings with writers far more talented than me. I went to an Earth Day Festival at the local private school and listened to students sing and play musical instruments, which inspired me to treat the planet better—for them. At a wine tasting event, I predictably liked them all and not once made use of the stainless-steel wine tasting spittoon.
I drove out to the Endangered Species Center and visited two rescued rhinos, a mother and daughter. Their eyes revealed their confusion and pain. Metal shields covered the gaping wounds to keep the rhino from rubbing off the dressings. They were held in place by screws, drilled deep into bone. The so-called “humans” that hacked off their horns and left them for dead, should have to change the dressings and witness the suffering. Once was all it would take.
I went to Acornhoek, the town where most of the domestics and contract workers for Hoedspruit lived. I bought fabric, ate local food, and asked, “Why don’t more people come here?”
I made pancakes for Scott. We ate a lot of ice cream and other fattening, satisfying foods we didn’t eat, or couldn’t get, while on the road.
I wrote about Ndoto on the patio of our little cottage at Raptors. I visited the day spa again. I went for long walks and gave Ndoto her weekly bath and a thorough spring cleaning. I shipped items home and had drinks again with Lisl.
Scott and I drove out of town to Ann’s Cotton Club for brunch on the lawn, and we had dinner at the wine club with a Swiss couple who built a home in Raptors View Estate; a house so beautiful and so perfectly positioned in the bush that Scott and I had a brief dream-talk about purchasing a home there too. And I got to fly with Scott at sunset over Hoedspruit.
I felt I knew Hoedspruit well. I knew all the restaurants, all the grocers, and all the shops. Lisl told me I knew more people than she did. Not true, but it began to feel like home. I couldn’t think of a better place to stay in South Africa while Scott gained more hours of flying.
But almost every time we were in Hoedspruit, despite the good friends and nearby wildlife, Scott and I would get out of sync. Our rhythm lacked a beat. This happened mostly because I am a worrier.
I thought I had expunged worry from my life. I lost some of my favorite humans, my mom, a brother, a sister-in-law, and two friends within a few years. After that, nothing seemed important enough to stress about.
Then Scott started flying. I knew he was a skilled and able pilot, but I got anxious when he flew. I would sometimes work myself into such a nervous state that I couldn’t stand who I became when he flew. He didn’t much care for it either.
It didn’t help that some of the drills he practiced were in the airspace just over Raptors Lodge. I could easily see the Bantam or Bat Hawk airplanes flying above me, and I could hear the engine go suddenly quiet when they practiced stalls. I could hear the take offs and landings because the airfield was located practically across the road. I was too close. Whenever my phone rang, I was sure it was someone with bad news. I forgot all about feeling adventurous, romantic, and brave. All the worrying made me selfish and pathetic.
Scott was appropriately absorbed in everything aeronautic and was disciplined about his training. He left the cottage by 6:00 a.m. and spent all day at the hangar, studying or reading while waiting for a chance to fly. He had all the ideal characteristics of a good pilot—focused, methodical, and calm. But mechanical failures could happen, and this was what caused all my anxiety. When he realized how worried I was, I began to receive texts that read “On the ground,” from Scott whenever he’d landed. What a pain I was.
Maybe it was because of all the loss we had suffered, but I was almost consumed by fear that something would happen to Scott too.
Finally, the day came that he had flown enough hours for an upgraded license. I left him a note, Meet me at the pool to celebrate when you get home, and signed it with a heart.
Expecting him at 5:30 p.m., as usual, I put on a wraparound dress (his favorite dress on or off me) and went to the pool with a bottle of wine and two glasses. I waited an hour before drinking the wine and falling asleep on the chaise lounges.
I woke up around 8:00 p.m. and walked back to the cottage. Scott had arrived only a half-hour before. He had never seen the note that I had left for him, and it was he who was a bit worried.
“We’re out of sync,” I said.
“Yeah,” Scott said, agreeing. “Let’s get back to the bush.”
I’ve met other wives of pilots since then who have said they too couldn’t relax until their husbands were safely on the ground. They also reported that their pilot had his head in the clouds. I’ve accepted that is the way pilots (and passionate people) behave. I wholeheartedly supported Scott in feeding his desire to fly, I just needed to cure my compulsive worrying and fear of losing him.
The key, I found, was that I either had to be in the plane with him (I’m never worried when I flew with him), or I had to be far enough away that I couldn’t see or hear the aircraft.
Finding a hippo to kiss didn’t hurt either.
BACK ON TRACK
All it took for us to get back on track was a tracking course.
Tracking enhanced our experience of living in the wild, and the wild was more than I had dreamed. By finding and deciphering animal tracks, we could walk in their coats for a time. Sometimes, if there was scat around, we could tell what they ate. Drag marks could tell a tale of a battle won or lost. Wallows told of a luscious roll in the mud to beat the heat or to remove pesky ticks. Best of all, Scott would be on the ground, by my side.
When we met our mentor Colin, over lunch, I liked him immediately. Maybe it was because he shared a name with my nephew Colin who also loved animals. Four other students filtered in and sat down to a meal of salads, potatoes, and meats. Mathews, a security guard at a nearby lodge who dreamt of becoming a professional tracker, was the one most eager to gain the qualification, one that would change his life. The other students were white expats or Afrikaners doing the course for personal enrichment or love of the bush, like we were.
Our tracking week was nonstop. We were up at dawn looking for tracks; leopard, impala, genet, and more. Lunch was followed by study or lecture, which took up most of the afternoon. Around 3:00, we’d fill our water bottles again and head out to track and trail one particular animal, such as rhino, on foot for sometimes hours. After dinner, we went to bed and dreamt about spoor.
I did not shine on assessment day. Out of the forty-seven tracks on the assessment, I missed eleven, so I qualified as a level 1 tracker. I was disappointed. A complicated scoring system didn’t help. Hard to identify tracks such as multi-padded porcupine footprints (one of my favorites) earned three points. Easy tracks such as elephant, earned only one point. But when an easy track was missed, three points were deducted. And I did miss easy ones. I said, “Something with a tail” for snake. And I stared at the final track for a long time until I convinced myself that Colin couldn’t possibly be asking for the obvious elephant print but rather wanted me to see the monkey’s paw within the elephant spoor. I’ll never forget the look on his face when I answered “monkey” and added “right front foot” just to prove I really knew my monkey paws.
Nearly everyone earned a level 1 qualification. Sadly, Mathews, the one who wanted it most, just missed passing by a few points. Since he didn’t even own a tracking book, we gave him ours, and Colin arranged a retest.
It was while on Colin’s tracking course that I learned I am not particularly consistent about being a carnivore.
We were on our way back to camp when Colin noticed two rhinos high up on a hillside. He pulled over to radio his guys with their location and confirm that someone had eyes on them.
Every day, rhinos were being slaughtered for their horns. A great deal of money and manpower went to protect them from poachers. While we watched the rhinos, Colin talked about the poaching of bushmeat for food or profit and the rise in poaching of elephant and rhino.
“I don’t understand how anyone could ever shoot an elephant,” I said.
Colin turned to look at me. “No? Have you ever tasted elephant?”
“Of course not,” I said.
“Well, elephant is meat. For people who are hungry, meat is meat. Bushmeat such as antelope, and primates, zebra, giraffe, even elephant can be part of traditional diets. Would you have people go hungry instead of eating, even if it was an elephant?”
“No, of course not. But there are other ways of getting meat than killing an elephant.” I said.
“Not everyone can go to a supermarket and buy a packet of beef.”
“I know that, but why eat an elephant?” I sat back in my seat getting more perturbed by the minute.
“Conservation issues are not black and white,” Colin said. “Consuming legally produced beef aside, illegal poaching of bushmeat for consumption or profit is a real issue. Some people poach for necessity, but lots of hunters poach because it pays. Ivory and rhino horn poaching gets the most press, but pangolins are poached for both their meat and their scales. They are the most poached animal in the entire world. For many, poaching pays more than farming or other legal ways to earn a living. There’s more risk and more reward. A big part of the problem is that most poachers never get caught. The other problem is that they don’t feel they have alternatives to poaching. Part of conservation is to present alternatives to poaching and hunting to get locals to understand that an African animal is worth more alive than dead. Now dogs are being used successfully to hunt poachers and local Africans are being trained on how to handle the dogs. We’re offering poachers the opportunity to have an occupation other than illegal poaching. It’s a win-win for conservation and community.”
Colin changed the subject. A few minutes later he said, “Is everyone ready for brunch? I’m feeling a bit hungry. In fact, I wish I had some of the impala biltong that my son gave me for Father’s Day.”
“Yum,” I said, also a bit peckish for biltong (dried meat cut into snacking strips). “But I prefer kudu.”
Colin smiled, and turned around to face me. “So, you like kudu, eh? That’s fine. I’ll call one of my guys right now and have them shoot a kudu for you, so you can have some kudu biltong.”
“Wait. What? No. Don’t do that,” I said with horror. Colin didn’t say a word but sat there looking at me with a knowing smile on his face.
“You see?” he said, still in teacher mode. “Conservation issues are not easy.”
HOW I SAVED LOUIE
I convinced Scott that we had time to visit Mozambique, so after the tracking course we drove to Maputo and began driving up the coast. We came to Zavora Beach Lodge, which was perched on a dune, seventeen sandy kilometers off the main road in Mozambique. It sits on what I consider the best piece of coastline in the country. The beach was clean and the waves were consistent. At low tide, a perfectly round, crystal clear snorkeling pool revealed itself just twenty feet from the shore. A constant soft breeze kept the malarial mozzies at bay, and while the beer wasn’t frosty, it was cool enough. Sounds perfect? Must be swarming with tourists, right? But it was empty.
Perhaps, it was the steep, sandy, traction-resistant road that led to the bluff campsite that kept people away, or that the lodge was mainly known for its scuba center, which catered to groups too tired to stroll the beach after two boat dives a day, but the beach here was beautifully deserted. I was often the only person walking the beach for a kilometer in either direction.
One late afternoon, Scott and I walked down the beach farther than we had gone before. We rounded a bend on the coastline to find twenty or more small fishing boats perched high on the slope of a dune. The beach was littered with heavy clumps of fishing net bound up with sand and seaweed. Looking closer, we noticed a tangled mess that contained not only seaweed and sand but also crabs that had been hopelessly trapped in the net by the tumbling surf.
“Oh, how sad,” I said bending at a mound with three dead crabs. Up to that point on our walk we had been in blissful, life is perfect moods, but now, as we turned away from the scene, we felt bummed. We walked a little farther before deciding to turn back to camp. As we passed the lump of sand and net with the three crabs, I don’t know why, but I stopped to lift it, to see how much it weighed. Just as I bent down to get a good hold, an eye on one of the crabs went sproing and locked eyes, rather eye, with mine. I looked closer to see that his other eye was ensnared tightly under a line of netting.
“Scott, one of these guys is alive. Poor thing. We’ve got to help him.” I took hold of a strand of netting and carefully tried to pull it over his head, but the net was too tightly wrapped around the crab’s body, head, and ten legs. “This is awful. We can’t just leave him here to die like this. Do you have anything sharp in your pocket? I want to try and cut this netting,” I said.
We tried using the teeth of Ndoto’s keys on the netting to no effect. I looked frantically for something sharper in the sand.
“Oh, Scott,” I said. “Would you please walk to camp and bring our Swiss Army Knife back with you? The little scissors you used to destroy my hair will be the perfect tool to free this crab.”
After some protest (did I mention we were at least a kilometer from camp? Plus, I probably shouldn’t have brought up Prince Valiant), Scott set off down the beach in a grudgey trudge toward the lodge.
I searched the area near the boats for something sharp. I tried a piece of hard black plastic to no avail.
“Hang on Buddy,” I said aloud. “Oh brother. I’m talking to a crab,” I also said aloud. Then, because his eye popped up again when I spoke, I imagined that the crab could understand that I was trying to help. I knelt next to his good eye and, channeling Band of Brothers said, “Stay with me, little guy. Help is coming.” He peered up at me with the trust of the innocent and pure. And desperate.
I continued searching for anything sharp enough to cut through the sturdy plastic net. I peered into each of the boats looking for a tool or a utensil. A few of the boats had small outboards attached, so I looked for something I could borrow or detach, to use for freeing the crab, who I had named “Louie” during my frantic and audible search.
Finally, I found a broken bottle. Perfect. I picked up a piece of glass, the size of a toddler’s palm, and a small but dangerously sharp shard miraculously broke off and fell at my feet. Even better.
“Sorry, Louie, this may be a little uncomfortable,” I said returning to the crab with the piece of glass that was as sharp as a surgical knife or at least a steak knife. His eye sprang up again. He looked at me as if to say, I’m terrified right now, and you are a little manic, but your salty tears are somewhat refreshing, and it seems that this is hurting you more than it’s hurting me, so go for it.
I started cutting with a sawing motion on the strand that trapped his other eye down in the prone position. Sproing. Now both eyes gazed into mine, begging for parole.
“Okay, now let’s free a leg, Louie.”
By the time Scott had returned with the Swiss Army Knife, I had managed to slice away only two more strands. There were dozens to go.
“Here,” Scott said with an edge in his tone. He handed me the tool. But when Louie looked at him with both eyes, he smiled. “Hey, he doesn’t look like a Cyclops anymore.”
“Didn’t you bring a camera? I wanted to have a photo of him.”
“No, Tris, I did not bring a camera, so you could take a picture of your crab. Sheesh,” he said, impatient once more. “Get a move on, will you? It’s going to be dark soon.
I used the tiny scissors and painstakingly cut strand after strand from Louie’s torso, his legs, and his head. I had freed most of Louie from his wet, heavy straightjacket, but he still had two legs entwined in a small piece of net.
Suddenly, he took off running. Not far, though. He stopped, turned, and looked at us as if to say, if you don’t mind, I’ll stick around until you finish the job. He allowed me to pick him up. I turned him over to cut the last few strands from his back legs then returned him to the sand. This was when it got weird. He just sat there looking at us.
“What’s the matter, Louie?” I looked up and down the beach around us and noticed many holes where crabs had dug in for the night.
“Oh, I get it. He needs a home. He’s probably so exhausted he can’t even dig.” So, I dug a hole for him. Louie watched while I dug sideways into the sand above the high tide line to create a haven from the crows, dogs, and whatever else preyed on crabs. It was so strange. He watched and waited, and then, when I was done, he scampered over to the hole and moved in to the deepest corner, comfy cozy.
“Good night, Crab Louie. Be well. And stay away from nets, will ya?”
We walked back to camp feeling good that something in the world, finally, was a little better from us being in it.
Three nights and many kilometers later, at Bahia Mar Resort and while Scott shook his head in disbelief, I ordered crab ravioli for dinner.
OH GREAT, THE WAR IS STARTING, AND I’M NAKED
When we entered Mozambique two weeks prior, our plan was simple: travel and camp along the stunningly beautiful coastline from Maputo to Inhassoro and then drive back to South Africa the way we came. That was the plan because even though the sixteen-year civil war officially ended in 1992, tensions remained in areas north of the town of Inhassoro between the Renamo Party and the ruling Frelimo Party. We’d heard that the only way to travel north of Inhassoro was in a military convoy. At each stop along our coastal route, we asked our hosts if it was safe to travel north of Inhassoro. They said yes, as long as travel was done in the convoy. But the convoy itself had come under attack from time to time.
“This is where we turn around and head back the way we came,” I said to Scott at the Dream Catcher Guesthouse in Inhassoro.
“Yep, that’s the plan.”
“Yeah, no way I want to be involved in any convoy. It would sure save us a lot of driving and be more fun than going back the way we came, but the convoy sounds way too risky,” I said.
“Right.” Scott rose from his chaise lounge and padded back to the pool. “Definitely, no convoy for us.”
“Remember that convoy we had to do in Laos? I’m never doing that again,” I said putting another layer of sunscreen on my legs. While backpacking in Laos in 1995, we’d traveled a dangerous road with a convoy. We had to hitch a ride with a trucker to do it. What I most remember about the experience, was that it was hot and humid, that we had to wait a long time for the military to arrive and organize the convoy, and the truck driver needed a shower. We did too.
“It would save us a lot of time though,” I said.
The Dream Catcher was the kind of place that bred complacency. The farther north we drove, the less we wanted to retrace the same potholed roads we had taken to get there.
“It sure would,” Scott said from the pool. “And driving all the way back to South Africa wouldn’t be nearly as interesting as taking a shortcut through Zimbabwe.”
“Yeah, but no convoy for me.”
The following day we sat in the pool watching fishermen cast nets from the shore.
“You know,” I said, pondering aloud, “if we did go to Zimbabwe by convoy, we could easily carry on to Namibia via the Caprivi Strip.” The Caprivi Strip is a narrow panhandle in Namibia accessible from Zimbabwe. It borders Zambia, Botswana, and Angola.
We spoke to a group of Zimbabwean businessmen at dinner, who told us they had just come by convoy that day.
“It’s perfectly safe. It was only annoying because they kept stopping so much. The road is bad in places, but your Landy can handle that, no problem.”
“Hmm,” I said. “I read in the news that Renamo forces dug three trenches across the road yesterday.”
“There are big potholes to be sure, but I don’t remember any trenches.”
I asked our practical host her opinion.
“There have been incidents of shootings, but a lot of what the media reports is rubbish.” She paused before adding, “Only you can make the decision. But I can tell you I wouldn’t hesitate to go to Zim by convoy.”
I posted the question to several Mozambican online communities and received a full range of responses from, “Don’t do it. Not worth the risk” to “I did it without incident two weeks ago. Go for it.”
Scott and I spent two days deciding. On most ballots, Scott voted FOR using the convoy. Ninety percent of the time I voted AGAINST, mostly because I could imagine what our families would go through if someone did end up taking a potshot at us. Then one night, I looked at Scott and said, “No one will want to shoot at Ndoto. Let’s do it.”
Now that we’d made a decision, I spent the next morning reading online about convoy dos and don’ts from people who had already done it.
“Don’t carry a knife, or machete, or pepper spray. These are deemed weapons, and you’ll be arrested if they’re in your possession. If you have alcohol with you, it might be confiscated. Hide it well. Hide all your electronics, too.”
“When you are in the convoy, don’t drive near vehicles carrying soldiers. Don’t get anywhere near the armored personnel carrier, either. It’s best if you don’t drive a Ford Ranger. They like to shoot at those. That’s the car favored by government officials. Get to the beginning of the convoy early, but not too early. If you arrive too early, the police will have time to search your car and find something to confiscate or a reason to fine or arrest you.”
I wondered how long it would take for us to relax in a country where statements like these were said the same way one might suggest, “Order the lemon herb chicken because the peri-peri chicken will give you the runs.”
Preparing the car (hiding the pepper spray, machete, computer, and the gin) and all the stress involved with coming to a decision, made me kind of constipated, so I had peri-peri chicken for dinner.
We left the next morning at 6:00 a.m., which would get us to the Save River Bridge in time to join the convoy at 9:00 a.m. We arrived with a few minutes to spare, just enough time for a few policemen to inquire what we had brought for them. More came to the window, even after I used the usually successful line I borrowed from a woman named Alice during an overland trip from Cairo to Nairobi in 2010. When Alice was fined for breaking a mirror in a pub in Ethiopia, she pled successfully to the policemen, “I am but a humble traveler” and was let go.
Finally, a woman carrying a red flag expressed her impatience for a delay that would result in no reward for her. She shouted something in Portuguese at the policeman and waved us onto the bridge with the same motion the “Gentlemen, start your engines” guy used to get the Indy 500 Race started.
We couldn’t tell how many vehicles were in the convoy. But we never saw another tourist. Overloaded semi-trucks and logging trucks took up 99 percent of the convoy. There were, of course, armored personnel carriers, pickup trucks filled with flak-jacket-wearing soldiers carrying large ass-kicking weapons. Hot, in heavy body armor, thirsty soldiers lined the road in random spots along the route. If the convoy was going slow enough, soldiers asked for water, and Scott gave them some from his water bottle. In two spots, there were makeshift semi-permanent army camps along the road.
The advantage of a convoy in Africa, besides the obvious, was that it turned the road into one-way traffic. For the first time in all our journeys in Ndoto, we didn’t have to worry about oncoming traffic or trucks passing us on a blind curve. All we had to worry about were bathtub-sized potholes and man-made trenches. There were three trenches, and I was glad we knew they were coming because if we had hit one at high speed, it would have meant the end to an axle, at least.
Sometimes, the convoy spread out, and we could barely see the truck in front of or behind us. But most of the time it was an orderly train of semis and one Ndoto.
At one point, the convoy stopped completely. Soon, truckers climbed down and headed to the side of the road for a wee. I was desperate to do the same. I debated going on the road between Ndoto and the truck in front of us, but during a squat dress rehearsal, Scott said he could see my bottom under the car. So, off I went into the bushes with the trusty golf umbrella that I never leave home without. A few truckers threw me a thumbs-up, when I returned.
Finally, after six hours, we arrived at the end of the convoy route. Truckers pulled over to rest and buy cashews from street vendors. We bought some too through the window but had no desire to linger. We needed supplies, and I badly needed to use the facilities.
“Scott, there’s a Shoprite market,” I said pointing to the only grocery store in Chimoio, a small town near the border. “Can we stop there? I really gotta go.”
While Scott shopped for supplies, I asked to use the toilet in my best Portuguese by asking loudly, “Toilet?” with unabashed urgency.
Soon, a young man sweeping aisles led me to some double doors, which led to the bowels of Shoprite. He handed me off to a woman, who guided me through a maze and upstairs to the lady’s room. Word of advice: If you later want to eat the food you bought at the Shoprite in Chimoio, do NOT look at what was behind the double doors. The bowels of Shoprite are literally like the bowels of anything.
The ladies room had three loos. They even had doors. But none of them had toilet paper. “Toilet paper?” I asked the woman. She answered in rapid Portuguese and made a motion as if she were birthing her eighth child, easy peezy, Well, just go.
“Uh, I really need some paper,” I said. I thought maybe high school Spanish would help. “Papel?” I asked. Or was it El papel? Los papeles?
Hands on hips and losing patience with me, the woman encouraged me once again in Portuguese to just go, dammit! By this time, I was near panic and broke into a flop sweat.
“Not pee-pee. Big Business. Number two, you know?” I said.
Blank stare.
I pictured myself, dejected and horrified, sinking slowly to the employee restroom floor with acceptance of the inevitable, like the bride-to-be in the movie Bridesmaids who was stricken with sudden, unstoppable food poisoning in the middle of the street.
Though the colonial era was long gone, Portuguese was still the official language. My blathering in English wasn’t getting me anywhere. Portuguese. Think of something in Portuguese.
I flashed on the time I was in Brazil, floating down the Amazon in a wooden riverboat. The place where the women prepared our meals (far too rustic to call a kitchen), was just outside our cabin, so each morning I greeted them with, “Bom dia,” which I was sure meant “good morning.” Every morning, they only responded with laughter. Finally, the captain pulled me aside and told me that my pronunciation was a little off, and that instead of wishing the cooks a good day, I was telling them they had nice asses.
“Bom, Bom,” I said pointing at my behind, to the area my gentile Aunt Martha called patootie. Not knowing what language “patootie” came from, I threw that in for good measure. “PATOOTIE,” I said with increasing urgency.
Nothing. By now her impatience was turning to fear. Her eyes widened and she took a step back.
“For the love of God, woman, I had PERI-PERI last night!”
At that, she left and returned with a roll of paper towels.
An hour later, we arrived at our camp for the night, Msika, a once thriving resort on Lake Chicamba near the border city of Mutare in Zimbabwe. The regular campsites were overgrown from lack of use, so they let us park next to a chalet and gave us a key, so we could use the toilet and shower inside. It was Saturday night, but there weren’t any guests at the resort, except for a few upper-class Mozambicans, getting their drink on at the bar.
One young Mozambican couple let me hold their soft new baby, which sent all sorts of warm endorphins coursing through my body. Then the manager said, “We are set to have a big fishing competition here at month’s end, unless war breaks out again that is,” which sent the cozy vibes crashing.
I was exhausted and desperate for a shower. I grabbed my towel and toiletry bag and headed to the chalet, while Scott unfolded our rooftop tent. I peeled off my sweaty, dusty, anxiety-ridden convoy clothes, tossed them in the corner and padded to the bathroom in my birthday suit.
Just as I was about to step into the shower, there was a massive explosion that shook the building. My heart stopped. I was grateful that the peri-peri was already through my system.
“Oh great. I’m naked and the war is starting,” I said to myself wearily. Back on went the funky clothes. I opened the door to the chalet just as Scott was about to enter.
“I forgot to tell you. They are blasting the mountain across from us to make fill for the new highway.”
Clothes off, my shower resumed.
The next day, we read the news. At 9:00 a.m. on the previous day, at the exact time we had crossed the Rio Save and joined the convoy, government troops had begun bombing the hell out of the Renamo base in Gorongosa National Park, the same park that had been filled with animals before the civil war, before most of them were slaughtered to fill soldier’s bellies.
This was bad news for Mozambique. In addition to the unrest and poaching, now there was a shortage of maize, a staple in Mozambique. Food prices were soaring. In the northern part of the country, kids were barefoot, and their clothes were in tatters. In the south, which was under the control of the Frelimo government in power, children had uniforms, shoes, backpacks, and schoolbooks. But there were a lot of children. Driving through Vilanculos at noon required negotiating an ocean of blue uniforms. Hundreds of children, all the same age, were leaving school at the same time hundreds more were arriving for the next session. There weren’t enough jobs to go around, so it was hard to imagine what these children will do when they graduate.
There was a phrase I didn’t much like, “This is Africa.” It was usually tossed out as a catchall explanation for all the hardship that plagued the continent, like it was inevitable. Suddenly, I found myself thinking it.
“Why are you crying?” Scott asked.
FUNNY PLACE, THE CAPRIVI STRIP
There were no regrets for taking the convoy. The shortcut across Zimbabwe led right to Namibia. Our little pail was almost empty.
The last time we were in Namibia was 2008 on an organized photographic safari. Namibia didn’t push all the Africa buttons for me, like Zambia did, but I loved the wide-open spaces, red sand dunes (the highest in the world), and the authenticity of the San People, the first people of Africa, the hunter-gatherer tribe from which almost all humankind is descended. This is a special corner of the world. But, whenever I would broach the subject of Namibia, Scott would always say, “Why would we want to go back there? The scenery is too much like Nevada. It even has a strip like Nevada,” Scott said facetiously. The Las Vegas Strip was not at all like the Caprivi one. The Caprivi Strip was rife with bird life, kept time with South Africa, and had a lot of nifty lodges and campsites. For a little piece of land, originally meant to provide colonial Germans a short cut to Tanzania (which didn’t work out as planned because Victoria Falls was in the way), the Caprivi Strip had a lot going for it. It also had several important rivers running through it, including the Chobe, the Kwando, and the iconic Zambezi.
One of the first places we stayed after leaving Mozambique was the Zambezi River Camp. We set up on the bank of the river, and, as usual, had the camp pretty much to ourselves, except for one overland truck.
We wandered over to introduce ourselves to the driver. The young British driver told us that it was his first time out of England and about how he was excited to begin his first tour as trip leader the following week in Kenya.
“I’ll pick the passengers up in the capital, in Arobia,” he said with a lift in his voice. Scott and I looked at each other, puzzled.
“You mean Nairobi?” we both asked at the same time.
“Yeah, that sounds right,” he said unfazed and still beaming with enthusiasm.
The sun was over the yardarm somewhere, so Scott began mixing gin and tonics in preparation for sunset. Just then, a man in a small motorboat pulled over to the bank near our camp and took out his cell phone. Scott, who loves boats as much as he loves planes (I guess we both love things that take us somewhere), walked over to hold the bowline while the man made his phone call.
When he finished, the man looked up at Scott, then over at me. “Would you like to go for a sunset cruise?” he asked.
“I’m sure we would,” I said grabbing a light sweater.
“I have ice. All you need are your refreshments,” he said.
We gathered our tall drinks and climbed aboard.
It might seem odd that a stranger would impulsively offer us a ride on his boat, and that we would readily accept with no questions asked. But, for whatever reason, we were often magnets for such happenings. We seemed to attract folk who enjoyed taking a chance on fate as much as we did.
Remember that phrase “This is Africa?”, often muttered cynically, whether stuck in a ridiculously long line at a border or watching men try to stuff a live cow into the back seat of a taxi. Well, it also referred to these kinds of chance meetings among strangers, where random offers of a lift, a boat ride, or a stay at a lodge were just part of life. If we were indeed all related to the San people, why not offer a boat ride to a brother? Or, maybe he just didn’t want to have sundowners alone.
Three times, we motored upstream on the wide, mighty Zambezi. Namibia was on our left, Zambia on the right. When we arrived under a large modern bridge that spanned the river between the two countries, Harold cut the engine. We floated back downstream until we could see Ndoto, then he started the engine and back to the bridge we went.
Harold was born in Zimbabwe, but now he lived in Namibia. We talked about Mugabe, elections and the price of petrol. His family had at one time owned several farms in Zimbabwe. As was the case for many colonial-era folks in Zim, all that was gone now.
It was getting dark, so Harold pulled over at our camp and bid us a good night. He wouldn’t even let us pay for petrol.
Ndoto had drawn quite a crowd while we were away on our sunset cruise.
Three ladies were draped on Ndoto’s front fenders posing for photos. A fellow sat on Scott’s camp chair repeating “Cool” over and over, while another man snapped photos of the dude trying to look cool in a camp chair. With Ndoto as the backdrop, he did look cool. There were hundreds of dressed-for-Sunday-service folks milling about on the lawns, most of them near Ndoto.
“Uh, good evening,” Scott said to the photographer.
“Good evening,” the ladies said cheerily in chorus. “Please, take a picture,” one lady suggested while handing a smartphone to Scott, who, after a pause, raised the phone to snap a photo. “Wait,” one of the other ladies said before walking over and gathering me in her arms. “We want Madam in the picture.” She placed me like a set decoration, near Ndoto’s right headlamp.
“What group are you with?” Scott asked as he snapped a few photos.
“Hey, Scott. Get one with our camera, would you?” I interrupted.
“This is our church group. We are having a revival this weekend,” another woman said through say cheese lips. “Those tents over there are where we eat our meals, but the church is located in a town thirty minutes from here.”
Photo session over, the group moved off to join the others in making a joyful noise, long into the night.
“Funny place, the Caprivi,” I said.
At Namushasha Camp, it was so hot we could do little else but sit in the swimming pool until we were pruney all over. There was a spunky ten-year-old girl wearing a vintage diving mask, the kind that had just one big lens. She submerged again and again to the bottom of the pool. She had a three-foot long plastic dinosaur tucked tightly under one of her arms.
After a while, she swam over to talk to me. She told me all about the bullfrog she had seen under the plant near the pool and about how she knew everything there was to know about bullfrogs because there were “bullfrogs aplenty,” at her family farm in Namibia. Then, she climbed out of the pool to check on the bullfrog. “Oh look,” she said with mild interest. “A Mozambican Spitting Cobra has the bullfrog in its mouth. He’s trying to swallow it.”
The Mozambican Spitting Cobra has potent venom that causes blindness and is one of the most dangerous snakes in Africa.
The little girl jumped back in the pool with her dinosaur, while I hightailed it the other direction thinking what a funny place the Caprivi was.
A GOAT, A CHICKEN, AND AN EGG
One of our favorite camps in the Caprivi was Nambwa, located on an island in Bwabwata National Park. Nambwa was called an island because it could be reached only during the dry season. Otherwise, it was surrounded by water.
We moved at sloth speed through thick, tire-sucking sand to get there. It was worth it though. There were only a few campsites at Nambwa, but they were in a truly unique and spectacular setting.
By the time we had arrived, all the campsites were taken. At first, the man at reception wanted to turn us away. But the camp attendant took one look at Ndoto and fell in love (she has this power over Africans of a certain age). He found a spot for us, back from the river, near the showers. This later turned out to be the best campsite of all.
At 3:30 p.m., we left for a game drive. We didn’t see much because we drove only as far as we could without getting stuck, about eight kilometers, before heading back to camp. Approaching the island, we spotted two large herds of elephants making a beeline for camp.
Scott smiled. “Let’s get back quickly, so we don’t miss them.”
“Ha,” I said. “I think Ndoto determines how fast we get back. She doesn’t like this deep sand. Not one bit.”
Sometimes, I project my feelings about the terrain onto Ndoto. My mother used to do this too, but she’d transfer how she felt onto our cat, Tiger. On a hot day she’d say, “Tiger doesn’t like this heat.” Mom never complained. But I always knew she was ill when she’d say, “Tiger doesn’t feel well.” If we began planning another extended trip away from home, she’d say, “Tiger doesn’t like it, not one bit, when you go away.”
We arrived at the same time as the herd. Because ritual should never be set aside, Scott quickly made sundowners. Then, we sat on our camp chairs enjoying one of the best wildlife encounters to date. The group of approximately twenty-five elephants acted like addicts in need of a fix by the way they scarfed down the plum-sized marula fruit from the trees that surrounded our camp. Our presence had no effect on their gluttony. They binged all night long.
At one point, after we had climbed into our nest for the night, a big bull elephant leaned gently on Ndoto’s hood while he munched on fruit from a nearby tree. Later, we heard the unmistakable munch, munch, munch of a hippo, just below our tent. We looked out to see him feeding on scraps that had fallen from the elephant’s mouth. I loved it when animals felt safe around Ndoto. I long for a cheetah to hop up on Ndoto one day and use her as a lookout.
I looked over at Scott who was smiling from ear to ear in the moonlight, thoroughly enjoying the moment.
“You still think Namibia is just like Nevada?” I said, teasing him.
We continued our traverse of the Caprivi Strip, staying at camps along the way. At Nunda Camp, we signed up for a sunset cruise offered by the lodge. Most of the folk on the boat wanted to see birds, but there were also some rapids optimistically called Hapa Falls, nearby. Our guide introduced himself then said, “If you see something that my eyes have not stuck to, let me know, so we may all see.”
For three hours, Scott and I stuck our eyes to crocodiles, hippos, darters, and herons.
Best of all, our trail camera recorded a river otter passing through our campsite that night. That kind of stuff really turned me on. We had quite a collection of nocturnal animals on our trail cam, a motion activated camera that could be tied to a tree or set on a rock to capture photos of animals: genet, hyena, anteater, leopard, bush baby, owl, civet, elephants, and zebra. Retrieving the trail cam and reviewing the images was the first thing I did in the morning, after coffee. It always reminded me of what a wild world it was out there, especially when no one was looking.
The most unusual place we stayed at in the Caprivi was Shamvura on the Okavango River. The centerline of the river there is the border with Angola.
The camp owners, Mark and his wife, Charley, were interesting, well spoken, and intelligent. When they weren’t busy hosting guests, they took in stray or orphaned animals. They had guinea fowl, a goat, dogs, cats, and even the occasional otter as pets. There was an old horse too. His teeth were so old, or non-existent, that his diet was made up of a thick liquid, like Ensure for horses. It looked like they put his food through a blender before pouring it into his trough. They are kind people.
When I phoned Charley to make the booking she said, “We look forward to your arrival this afternoon. On your way, would you mind buying all the bacon in all the stores in town before coming out to the farm? I’ll pay you back when you get here.”
When we arrived, a friendly old lab named Creampuff must have smelled the several pounds of bacon we had bought because he practically climbed into Ndoto in the car park, and he spent all his free time (meaning all his time) with us at our campsite.
Charlene reimbursed us for the bacon and then told us that her husband, Mark, was under the weather. “He’s in bed with the goat,” Charlene said with a sigh. “Usually, after Mark gets up in the morning, I have a nice long cuddle in bed with the goat. But since he’s been sick, I haven’t had my turn.”
I happen to like goats, so when we checked out the following morning, I commented that I was sorry I had missed the goat.
“Would you like to see him? He’s probably still in bed with my husband,” Charlene said. She led us to her bedroom, where we didn’t find Mark, but we did find a male goat the size of a pony, sprawled out at the head of the bed, atop Charley and Mark’s pillows. But that wasn’t all. A chicken was perched on the rump of the goat.
“Aw, see? She’s laid her egg,” Charlene said after she reached under the hen and plucked out an egg.
Funny place the Caprivi.
“This puts a whole new spin on breakfast in bed,” I said shaking my head.
GOD, PLEASE WATCH OVER THESE PEOPLE
On the way to Grootfontein the next day, we came upon a truckload of young, old, and extremely old San folk. They were stranded, out of petrol. While Scott wrangled a jerry can from Ndoto’s roof and handed it to the driver, I stood with a group of teenage girls and a gorgeous old woman who sat on her haunches smoking an enormous hand-rolled cigarette. At least, I thought it was tobacco.
The eyes of San people are bright and somewhat narrow to begin with, but her eyes reminded me of Jeff Spicoli, the permanently-stoned character in the 1986 film Fast Times at Ridgemont High. She spoke Khoisan, a language of expressive clicks, with sharp intakes of air that sound like someone sucking on an empty bottle of milk. The elderly woman ran her eyes over Ndoto, took a drag on her cigarette, and said, “(Click) The Gods must be crazy.”
After filling his tank, the driver handed the jerry can to Scott and asked if he had a piece of blank paper. On the paper, he wrote, “God, please watch over these people. They helped us with petrol,” and gave it back to us.
“Well, this will come in handy,” I said tucking it away in the little booklet of documents we presented whenever policemen asked to see our papers.
All over Africa, Ndoto attracted attention. But in bushman territory, she usually drew a crowd.
“Now I know why everyone in Namibia seems to recognize Ndoto,” I said to Scott as we drove away. “An old Landy just like her was in the movie The Gods Must be Crazy. The bushman in it, who tries to get rid of the Coke bottle was from Namibia.”
In Grootfontein, we stopped to check out a lodge that also had a campsite. But for three dogs and two cats that happily bounded around our legs, the place seemed deserted. After a while, a large man dressed like a German farmer appeared. This wasn’t a surprise. Namibia was colonized by Germany and was once part of German Southwest Africa.
“Nein, nein, nein, nein, nein,” he said wearily. “No, no, no, no, no. Too early. Nein, nein, no, no,” he said again, just in case we hadn’t heard the first eleven times he’d said it. “Too much noise, too early.”
It was ten in the morning.
“We just wanted to check out your camping area,” I said.
“Too early,” he said again.
“Okaaaaay,” Scott said slowly. “Do you happen to know a good Land Rover mechanic in town? One that might have spares?”
We’d been looking for a bushing to replace the one on the hood that had disintegrated or exploded on one of the teeth-chattering corrugated roads in Namibia. We also needed to replace our gas cap.
The German gave us confusing directions to the home of another German, one who was a mechanic. “But if you go now, you might be too early,” he said.
By the time we found the place, it wasn’t too early. The man greeted us with, “These Landys are shit. The seats are shit, but they are so comfortable, yes?” Which was confusing any way we looked at it.
“Uh, no, actually they aren’t comfortable,” Scott said speaking from more than forty-thousand thousand kilometers of experience.
Then the man told us all sorts of things that were shit on Land Rovers, about how he shipped his Series III from Europe many years ago, and about how all his tires were shit.
But he seemed to know Land Rovers, so Scott forged ahead. “Do you have time to look at our Landy?”
“No, I’m fully booked. No time. Nein, nein, nein.” Then he just kept chatting away about other shitty things on Land Rovers.
“Do you have any spare parts?” Scott asked.
“Yes.”
“If you had a spare gas cap lying around, I sure could use it,” Scott said.
“Yes, I have.”
“You have?”
“Yes.”
“Well, if you have one, I’ll buy it from you.”
By this time, I had a migraine. The mechanic left and came back with a gas cap, but it had no gasket, so it was no better than the one we already had. We said our goodbyes and left.
“Funny place, the Caprivi. It’s almost noon, and we accomplished nothing. I’m hungry. Let’s find some Oryx stroganoff,” I said over my growling stomach.
Oryx is a majestic antelope prevalent in Namibia. The long, javelin-like horns of the Oryx are why people believe in unicorns. All you had to do was see an Oryx that was missing a horn to know why. Oryx Stroganoff was the entrée of the day at almost every restaurant or lodge we encountered in Namibia.
Scrolling through the GPS, I found Outjo Bakery, an oasis that sat at a crossroads between the boondocks and the desert.
“This is convenient. The restaurant is across the street from Weimann’s Auto Repair. Let’s go there first and see if they carry bushings or gas caps,” Scott said.
Weimann’s was a shop so German-like that when we walked in, we felt like we were in Munich at a Mercedes garage. It was also extremely tidy.
“Nein, nein, nein. We don’t carry those items,” said the owner.
“Okay. Well, do you have time to do an oil change?” Scott asked.
“Ya,” said a man named Peter.
We handed him the keys and walked across the street to the Outjo Bakery, which, in addition to oryx stroganoff, has one of the most stylish restrooms I’d encountered in Africa.
Between bites of oryx meat pie Scott said, “You know, Namibia is more than just deserts, strange German men, and good bakeries. Namibia also has Etosha National Park. Want to go?”
“Can a hen lay an egg on a goat?” I said.
WE CAME FOR ELEPHANTS, NOT COWS
Etosha National Park is all about the waterholes. Without them, the animals wouldn’t survive in this vast, arid park. It is the largest pan in Africa.
At the Halali waterhole, we watched something we had only read about—the normally solitary black rhino socializing with other rhino by moonlight. After a few mock charges from opposite sides of the waterhole, two mothers with their babies moved together and touched noses. The babies were nose-to-nose and lip-to-lip for almost ten minutes.
The waterhole at Namutoni wasn’t the best for wildlife viewing, but it made up for it with a fort nearby. Before sunset, we climbed the narrow steps to the rooftop that overlooked all of Etosha. It was a feast for the eyes that worked as well on our beings as meditation. We were glad we brought sundowners and our camp chairs and that we stayed until the stars came out. We enjoyed the cool night air and listened to the bush chorus. Tree limbs swayed in a gentle breeze and birds called to one another before selecting a tree to roost in for the night. A crack of a branch alerted us that an elephant was having a nibble. Beauty, does have a sound.
Then there was the epitome of all waterholes, Okaukuejo. Travelers the world over put their feet up on a short rock wall that separates the waterhole from the lodge. The wall made it safe to sit for hours or for days watching multiple species of animals come from far across the plain to drink.
The semicircular seating around the waterhole was like an arena. It was built in such a way that viewers were protected from the animals, yet so close to the action you feel you could reach out and touch the players. Animals were there around the clock, pretty much,
I climbed down Ndoto’s tent ladder at 1:00 a.m., 2:00 a.m., and 3:00 a.m., to see what kind of animal was thirsty at that hour of the night. Usually there were one or two other nature addicts around the waterhole at that hour, hoping to glimpse a lion, elephant, or an endangered black rhino, but often I had the place to myself. I’d challenge anyone go to the waterhole at Okaukuejo alone, in the middle of the night, and not feel fortunate and moved.
I climbed back up the ladder after a midnight visit to the waterhole one night to find Scott awake, looking through the Tracks4Africa guide book for Namibia.
“It says here there are desert elephants to be found in Damaraland. Want to go?” Scott asked.
“Does Oryx Stew taste better than it looks? Of course, I want to see desert elephants.”
“Okay. It’ll take a few days to get there, but there’s stuff to see on the way.”
Don’t tell Scott I said so, but except for odd Germans and the Herero tribe women who dressed like Betsy Ross and wore hats that were shaped like cow horns, Namibia does look like the southwest corner of America. Especially near a lodge located at the top of a butte called Ugab Terrace. Up there, looking out over the landscape, it was hard to remember I wasn’t in Utah, or the Monument Valley, or Sedona Arizona, or even Nevada. It looked so much like Utah that the photo of Ugab Terrace I posted on social media, had friends and family in the States thinking we’d returned home without telling them.
Driving farther into the Namib Desert, we came to the epitome of boondocks—Damaraland. Gigantic smooth round balls of granite lay in piles as far as the eye could see.
“Hey, this must be where giants lost their marbles,” I said.
We didn’t find elephants, not even one. “They used to be here but no more,” said the manager of a camp in what was supposed to be ground zero for desert ellies. What we did find were flies. There were thousands of flies. The flies were there because the camp was also a cattle farm.
“You can have cows or you can have tourism,” Scott said to the camp attendant, who complained of so few visitors. He continued, “You can have cows if you have desert elephants, but you can’t have cows if you don’t have elephants. People won’t want to come to camp around cows and flies.” I admired his calm demeanor given there were twenty flies up his nose and five in each ear.
SEA TO SHINING SEA
“Sea to shining sea—Indian Ocean to the Atlantic, Mozambique to Namibia,” I shouted in a mission-accomplished voice, when I dipped my toes into the frigid water of the Atlantic for good luck.
We had arrived at Swakopmund, a city founded by German colonists in the late 1800s. It felt like a little piece of Germany in Africa, sandwiched between the Atlantic Ocean and the Namib Desert. Not big in size, it was big on adventure. From quad-bike riding, to sand boarding down massive dunes, Swakopmund was on most adrenaline junkie’s bucket list. There were plenty of holiday homes to rent, and it had all the conveniences of a big city.
For overlanders like us, Swakop, as it was sometimes called, was also a good city to get caught up on things. We could shop at a big supermarket, purchase needed car parts, and go to the cinema. We ate in good restaurants and took walks around town, doing touristy things. We crossed the streets with “confusions” of guinea fowl. That was what groups of guinea fowl were called—confusions. They didn’t seem confused to me since they stayed in the crosswalks and paraded through the city like they owned it.
The coast of Namibia is often shrouded in heavy fog. It is so commonly chilly, there are fireplaces and bathrooms at each grassy site in the campground, making one almost forget about the fog. Which was probably why I had forgotten that fog makes aluminum ladder steps as slick as ice. I slipped on the top step one morning while climbing out of the tent and landed on my back on the ground in the shape of the chalk outline of a dead body on Law and Order.
Scott, still warm and cozy inside the tent, heard me fall. “What the hell! What happened? Are you okay?”
“Uh, I’m going to lay here for a bit. Stuff hurts,” I said, glowering at the fogbank that began just above my nose. My mother’s words came to me in a flash, “Always wear a pair of clean undies. You never know when you might be in an accident and have to go to the hospital.”
I didn’t want to go to the hospital that day of all days because all of my underwear was at the full-service laundry in town and I was wearing a pair of Scott’s jockeys, which, if that wasn’t embarrassing enough, had also given me a rash on my butt. Mom would not have liked this situation, not one bit.
I did an inventory and concluded that what hurt most was my pride, my shoulder, and my ankle—mostly my ankle. Scott got me to a standing position, but I couldn’t put any weight on my foot. I tried to RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation), but it was excruciating.
“Darn. Why did this have to happen on the day I’m scheduled for a pedicure?”
“Here, I’ll help you,” Scott said. “Put your hiking boot on for support. You can use the umbrella as a cane and lean on me while we walk to the pedi place.”
“The question is, is it worth it to pedi just one foot?” I asked. The soles of my feet were as tough as elephant skin. My heels were cracked so deep I could have kept spare change in the crevasses. “Yeah, it’s worth it,” I said answering my own question.
With one hiking boot, an umbrella, a dose of anti-inflammatory, and a true-blue man, I made it to the salon on time.
“Pedi for one, please. One foot that is.” I explained that because of a recent injury to my ankle they would only need to do one foot.
“Let’s have a look,” said a stylish black Namibian with intricately plaited cornrows. It took some time to extract my foot from my boot. During the walk, it had inflated the volume of the Zimbabwe dollar in 2000. “I think we can manage if we are really gentle,” the pedicurist said examining my ankle and foot. “Jackie! Horse liniment!” she said to her assistant in a STAT tone.
“Nay, did you say horse liniment?” I said, trying a little stable humor.
“Yes. Don’t worry, I’ll be gentle.”
But she wasn’t gentle. She scooped out a healthy glob of liniment from a big, Costco-sized jar with a label that clearly read, for horses and assertively massaged my hoof. Determined to get the swelling down to a manageable size, she worked the ointment all around the sprain, up my calf, around my foot, and between my toes while pushing the fluid away from the injury. I was prepared for it to hurt. But it didn’t. It felt wonderful.
“Wow. That stuff is amazing,” I said. “Makes me want to buy some Mane ‘n Tail for my hair.” I chuckled.
She didn’t crack a smile. “Oh yes Sister, you can get Mane ‘n Tail at any chemist in town.”
Swakopmund was different from the rest of Namibia. Being on the coast gave it a more laid-back feeling than other cities. All the German restaurants, beauty salons, and imported foods made me almost forget I was in Africa. But I was quickly brought back to the continent I loved when Namibians, the ones without German heritage, addressed me.
Sister, Madam, Mother, Auntie, Mama, Mrs. I’d been called one or another of these monikers whenever I was in Africa. In Zimbabwe, it was Auntie. In Zambia, it was Madam Treeza. But in Namibia I was all of these. The first time I was called “Mama” was in Namibia. “How are you today, Mama?” and, “Let me help you, Mama.” I thought how well Namibians knew their audience because I didn’t mind it. Not one bit.
Boys help us celebrate crossing the equator for the second time.
Taking another tracking course, this time in Hoedspruit South Africa.
Even Jackson, the first person to fly a microlight solo from England to Australia, hosted us at her home in Dar es Salaam. We had flying, Land Rovers, and an appreciation for beer in common.
Lamu alley shop.
Scott chartered a dhow so we could watch the race up close off Lamu, Kenya.
Donkey race, Lamu, Kenya.
Beach camping on Lake Malawi.
Livingstonia, Malawi. This boy climbed into the driver’s seat put his hand out and asked, “keys?”
“Show me your country.”
All over Africa, people were fascinated by our maps.
Children loved to race alongside Ndoto.
Girls were much more reserved than the boys. Livingstonia
Another broken leaf spring.
An anti-poaching officer hitches a ride with us from Mana Pools, Zimbabwe.
A San woman in Botswana took one look at Ndoto and said, “The Gods Must be Crazy.”
Usch and Tris outside the Victoria Falls Hotel before the train accident, Vic Falls, Zimbabwe.
Sunrise atop the world’s largest sand dune.
The walk from Victoria Falls to Msuna. An annual hundred and twenty-five kilometer walk through rural Zimbabwe to raise money for a country school.
Four days in rural Zimbabwe was a healthy antidote after the events surrounding the tram accident.
Occasionally, there were spontaneous meet ups with other Land Rover lovers.
Tris with her brother Sean.
Scott in the hammock that goes with us on every trip. Limpopo River, Tuli Block, Botswana.
Making a plan.
Ndoto where she is most strong, were she was born, South Africa.
NOT MY DAY TO DIE
As I have said before, among the enjoyable surprises that happen when we are overseas is unexpectedly running into people we know.
In Bangkok in 2008, we climbed into the same airport minivan as Anna Marie, a Dane we’d first met in 1995 on an overland trip from London to Kathmandu. That same year, in Malaysia, we were in the same shop and at the same mall, at the same moment as Maria from that same Kathmandu trip. Another time, in Bangkok we discovered we were on the wrong dock waiting for a riverboat with an Irishman whom we’d met in Zimbabwe in 1995 and who was also on the wrong dock. Now that we were back in Zimbabwe, we had a chance to connect with Usch, a German book translator we’d first met in Nairobi in 1995, who happened to arrive in Victoria Falls at the same time as we did.
Usch loves Africa maybe more than we do. She had arranged her life so that she could work in Zimbabwe, translating books from English into German for several months every few years. When we are there at the same time, all three of us are in sync.
We had just settled in at the Victoria Falls Rest Camp when Usch strolled over as if we had just bid her farewell an hour before, rather than several years prior. We opened a bottle of wine and ate feta cheese and olives for dinner around a warm campfire. We told Usch about Namibia and about the special elephant encounter we had at Nambwa. She told us about her latest translating assignments and about taking care of her parents back home. We had a lot to catch up on, but we all needed an early night. Scott and I were doing the 10K portion of the Victoria Falls Marathon, a benefit for the Wild Dog Conservancy, while Usch would be on the banks of the Zambezi shooting photos of her Rasta friends in the morning. We arranged to meet again for cocktails the following evening at the Victoria Falls Hotel.
We arrived at the beautiful colonial hotel the next afternoon around 4:00 p.m., worse for wear and limping. I had an enormous blister after the 10K, and my Namibian sprain wasn’t completely healed yet. Also, a few years earlier, while barefoot bowling at a two-lane bowling alley along the Nile River in Luxor, Egypt, my team won, and I badly injured my Achilles tendon when I did my happy dance with a bowling ball in my arms. That was acting up too, so we allowed plenty of time to get to the hotel. We arrived to the Vic Falls Hotel early because I wanted to do the nightly tram ride that rolled on the train tracks to the bridge at sunset. I would be back in time to meet Usch for cocktails on the terrace.
As we approached the hotel, we could see a group of attractive foreigners in 1920’s-style costumes posing for photos in the circular drive. They all looked so striking and exotic that I took out my camera and snapped a few photos as well.
“They look like Hollywood actors,” I said to Scott. “They are all so perfectly manicured.”
We walked into the hotel and through the lobby. Coming down the stairs was a blonde woman, also dressed in costume. She caught my eye, and I smiled.
“What a beautiful dress,” I said.
“Oh, I’ve had this forever. I brought it with me from Southern California. There is a group of us here from all over—California, New York, Europe, and Australia—for a wedding that’s taking place in Botswana in a few days. Tonight, we’re all dressed in the era of the hotel.”
“You must be part of the group that is out front taking photos.”
“Oh, is that where they are? We are supposed to go on a train ride in a few minutes.” She looked up the stairs and said, “Shame though, my husband is the only one in the group whose luggage didn’t arrive, so he doesn’t have his costume.” She took a step away. “Well, enjoy your evening. I better catch up with the rest,” she said and headed outside through the lobby.
We found the concierge at his desk. Usually Scott and I did this type of excursion together, but for whatever reason Scott had no interest in going on the tram that evening.
“Tram ride for one,” I said with Scott in tow.
The concierge picked up the phone and called the tram company at the period train station, located just across from the entrance of the hotel. He asked for my name, gave it to the tram reservation lady, and then hung up.
“Okay,” he said. “You are confirmed for the tram ride this evening, but you’ll need to pay for it now at the station. I’ll walk you over.” The concierge escorted us to the station entrance, which took all of one minute and wished us a good evening.
“Hello,” I said. “I just made a reservation for the sunset tram, but I need to pay.”
“There is no tram today,” the ticket agent said.
Scott and I looked at one another.
“But I just booked the tram not five minutes ago.”
“No, the tram is not running today,” Tracy said again. “I can put you on the dinner train.”
“I don’t want to do the dinner train. I want to take the tram that goes to the bridge and be back in time to meet a friend at the hotel for dinner.”
Tracy, Scott, and I went around and around. I was incredulous that a tram that was booked a few minutes before was suddenly not running.
“Well, when will the tram be running again?” Scott asked Tracy.
“There is a ride tomorrow morning, which includes a walking tour under the bridge.
Scott looked at me. “If you want to do that one, I’ll do that one with you. Walking under the bridge sounds interesting.”
“It’s not the sunset ride I wanted, but okay.” We booked and paid for the tram ride for the next morning.
“That was weird,” Scott said as we walked back to the hotel and out onto the terrace.
“To say the least,” I said. “It makes no sense.”
The mist that billowed up from Victoria Falls could be seen from the expansive lawns leading down to the edge of the gorge. We ordered two Chocolate Martinis, Usch’s favorite Vic Falls Hotel drink, and sat at a table with a view to await her arrival.
There is something about Africa. If you are a new expat in town, it only takes the locals a short time before they know who you were, where you are from, and what you are doing there. So, we weren’t surprised when the waiter who brought our second round of martinis a little later, said, “Weren’t you meant to be on the tram?”
“Yes, I was, but the tram did not run this evening.”
“The tram did run. But it has just been smashed by a freight train.”
Scott and I looked at one another with mouths agape. He reached over and held on to my arm. “Oh my God.”
“But the tram . . .” I stopped myself, confused. “Scott, I have to go to the station. That woman we spoke to by the stairs might be hurt.” I walked quickly over to the station, where I found Tracy and the other staff members in tears.
“Where is the crash? Where is everyone?” I asked.
“The tram is smashed further down the track, near the dinner train, which derailed an hour ago. The passengers have all gone to the hospital.”
“Oh my God. Is there anything I can do?” I asked.
“You can pray for the person whose head is broken open.”
I returned to Scott and told him what I had learned. “But Scott, why would Tracy have said it wasn’t running? And why would she have tried to book me on a dinner train that had derailed before we even spoke to her?”
I didn’t know what to feel. It made no sense. We sat in bewildered silence until Scott reached over again and said quietly, “I guess it wasn’t your day to die.”
Usch arrived, and we told her what had happened. No longer in a mood to drink chocolate martinis, we walked back to camp.
I couldn’t sleep that night.
Was this what survivor guilt felt like? I wondered. I kept picturing all those beautiful people, there in Africa to celebrate a happy event, now lying in a hospital in Zimbabwe.
The next morning, we walked back up the hill to the hotel. Near the steps to the entrance, I recognized one of the men from the wedding party. He was sitting in a wheelchair with a cast on his leg and another on his arm.
I went to him. “Are you okay?” I asked. “I heard about the crash. It’s awful. Is there anything I can do?”
“Thank you, I don’t think so,” he said slowly with a proper British accent. “I’ve been at the hospital all night.” He paused as though still in shock. “There was no electricity, so they couldn’t take an X-ray of my arm. Nevertheless, they tried, unsuccessfully, to set it without benefit of a picture.” He paused again. “I’m being flown back to England. I’m waiting for an ambulance to take me to the airport now. I haven’t seen anyone since the crash.” Dark rings circled his eyes. “You see, I’m the best man, and I don’t even know the condition of the bride and groom.”
“Do you remember what happened?” I asked.
“It was all quite strange. For some reason, the tram operator wanted us to see a derailed dining car. It’s supposed to be an historic train or something. We arrived at the derailed train, which had been on its way to pick up dinner passengers at the station, and everyone on the tram stepped off to have a look. Five minutes later, we were all back on the tram and less than a minute after that another train suddenly rammed us from behind. It’s all so strange. Many people were seriously hurt. One of the passengers doesn’t know who he is, where he is from, or what happened. He kept asking me, but I couldn’t help him, because I didn’t know him.”
“Oh, how awful,” I said again. I didn’t know what else to say. I had seen him with a little boy in the hall of the hotel just after speaking with the woman on the stairs the evening before, so I asked about the boy.
“Fortunately, my son wasn’t on the train, and he is fine.”
An ambulance pulled up just as I wished him well.
“It just doesn’t make sense,” I said, repeating myself to Scott, who had been waiting for me on the hotel steps. I told him what the best man had said.
“That dining car was the train that Tracy had said I could go on instead of the tram. Maybe she didn’t yet know that it had derailed.”
We walked over to the station office, where a subdued staff member told us that with no tram and no train, the company was shutting down.
Again, I couldn’t sleep.
The next day, I found a story online about the crash. The bride was a renowned photographer from New York, who’d spent considerable time shooting in Africa. The groom was one of the richest men in Australia. They survived the crash needing only stitches. One person in their wedding party had died. There was a photo of him with his wife taken on the tram moments before the crash. He wore a warm smile on his face and his arm was around a woman. He was the only one not in costume. The woman was the one we had spoken with on the stairs. It was her husband, the one whose luggage had not arrived in Zimbabwe, who had died. His beautiful wife was in the hospital with her jaw broken in two places.
In the morning, still disjointed, we drove out of town. I was glad to leave Victoria Falls, and relieved that we had earlier committed to a 100-kilometer walk through rural Zimbabwe to Msuna. It was also a fundraiser, with donations from walk participants benefiting children at a rural school.
The timing of the walk helped immensely. The weeklong trek to Msuna worked like an antidote to the unexplainable events surrounding the tram crash. Routine can be a good thing in times of, what was this. . . grief? Besides, when fate gives you a second chance, it’s good to do something that helps others.
Scott walked the one hundred kilometers, but I biked the distance. I had strained my tendon worse than I thought, so I borrowed the bicycle of a Rastafarian friend of Usch’s for the week.
Each morning we rose at dawn. After coffee and rusks, the five walkers set off on the dirt road towards Msuna. Judy, the organizer, drove Ndoto while I cycled alone.
While I biked through the beautiful Zimbabwean countryside, I felt thankful for the healing power of nature. My ankle slowly got better, and I thought about home, and family, and reliable train journeys.
For the first time on the trip, I was looking forward to going home. I missed my family. They may have sensed it because, though I hadn’t told them about the train crash, I began receiving messages from them. I even received a text from one of my nephews, Colin, that morning saying that he couldn’t wait until I got home, so I guess they missed me a little too.
FULL SAILS
Since the tram accident, the wind had gone out of my sails. I thought about home and family more and more and began looking forward to leaving Africa. We had less than three weeks left together before my flight to America. Scott would stay in Africa an extra month to take an intensive tracking and trailing course, a bucket (big bucket) list thing for him. He wanted me to stay and do the course with him, but our tenants were moving out, and our cat needed to be picked up. I really just wanted to go home.
“Can’t you ask Bonnie if the cat can stay another six weeks?” Scott asked.
“No, Pika cannot stay another six weeks. I would not feel good about asking Bonnie to keep her longer than agreed. Besides, Bonnie is helping move her pregnant daughter and son-in-law across the country just as soon as I get back and pick up the cat.”
He looked at me and frowned.
“Do the course, Scott. Seize the day. You don’t know when this opportunity will come along again, and you love this stuff so much. I do too, but I’m feeling a strong tug toward home. It’s a new feeling for me.”
It was true. Never had I felt so ready to go home. Never had I felt so homesick.
Wanting to make the most of the little time we had remaining, we made a plan to return to places we loved: Hwange National Park, the Tuli Block in Botswana, and Kruger National Park.
Though my spirit was deflated, serendipity it seemed was still alive and well by the time we arrived in Hwange National Park.
We stopped at the historic Hwange Safari Lodge for afternoon tea on the expansive lawn near the waterhole and swimming pool. On a whim, we decided to get a room for the night. I had long wanted to see the elephants known as the Presidential Herd that roamed near the lodge. This was my chance. Plus, the Tusker Cocktail Bar was there.
I didn’t think I could find the herd on my own, so I signed up for an afternoon game drive at reception. Scott was keen to relax at the lodge with a good book, so I would be going without him.
At 4 p.m., I boarded one of two empty game-viewing vehicles parked near the entrance of the hotel. Soon, a group of mostly men distributed themselves amongst the two vehicles. They were traveling together, all from South Africa. I asked the man seated next to me about their itinerary.
“We’re on a Land Rover rally from Cape Town to Dar es Salaam. Most of the guys are with Land Rover Magazine. Also traveling with us is Ruben Riffel,” he said pointing first to a row of four new model Landys in the carpark that were covered in sponsor logos, then to a man in the vehicle ahead of us. Ruben Riffel was Chef and owner of several restaurants in South Africa.
“At almost every place we stop for the night, Ruben exchanges cooking tips with the local chefs or joins them in their kitchens,” Rick, who was an avid explorer and author, continued talking. In 2011, Rick and his wife drove a two-wheel drive vehicle in a rally from London to Cape Town.
Along with Rick were Ian Theron, the Technical Editor at Land Rover Magazine, Andy Mark, the Editor in Chief, and Photographer, Anton Pretorius. I was on a game drive with Land Rover lovers who embodied adventure. I didn’t know about the romantic part, but my guess was that their wives were very lucky women.
“I have a Land Rover too,” I said with a smile. “But it’s a little older than the ones you’re driving. She’s going on forty-one.”
Anton overheard our conversation and began asking about Ndoto and our journey. I began telling him our story when the guide shushed me. “Look, there they are. The Presidential Herd.”
Around fifteen elephants were grouped together next to some thick brush that bordered a fire break. They were calmly winding their trunks around tall grass, yanking it out of the ground, and shaking off the dirt before stuffing it into their mouths. This was only part of a herd of hundreds of elephants that were awarded the name Presidential after former President Mugabe decreed in 1990 that this particular herd in Hwange would be protected from culling or poaching. I doubted a Mugabe decree in 1990 protected these elephants today, if it ever did. Still, they appeared calm and unharassed and it was special to see them regardless. They were so relaxed, the drivers pulled out the coolers full of sundowners and allowed us to climb down and enjoy our drinks nearby.
Back at the hotel, Anton snapped a few photos of me standing next to Ndoto in the car park. I wished I had given her a bath that day. I wished I’d had one too.
Then Rick said, “We are having a braai near the pool in about an hour. You and your husband are welcome to join us. Ruben is cooking.”
Suddenly my sails were full. “I’m sure we would love to,” I said.
I went to the room to tell Scott about my experience. “They are Land Rover people,” I said, and then I went on about our invitation to a dinner that would be prepared by a famous chef. “Do you want to go?”
“Why not?” he said. “But I’m oryxed out, so I hope dinner will be something other than antelope.”
With drinks in hand, I winked at Scott as we watched Ruben work his magic on top-quality beef.
“Definitely not oryx,” I said close to Scott’s ear.
Then Ruben prepared the most delicious mushroom sauce I had ever tasted, while Anton filmed and took close-up photos of Ruben’s artful hands over the saucepan. Slices of tender and mouthwatering beef were dipped into the sauce and handed over to us as appetizers. I couldn’t believe our luck in meeting such a terrific tribe of Land Rover people.
We had a few beers. Then we had wine with dinner. Then we had Scotch. When I commented to Rick’s son that the brilliant full moon, rising over the waterhole looked exactly like Cartman’s head, a character on the cartoon show South Park, he almost dropped his drink. He grinned at me then said he didn’t expect me (a woman my age?) to have known anything about South Park and that the moon did look exactly like Cartman’s head.
LOVE WINS
Rick, Anton, Reuben, Andy, and I all became connected on Facebook that night, which was how I knew that after the rally, Rick’s son went to Thailand to explore more Cartman-looking moons over Bangkok.
The Land Rover rally left the next morning well before dawn. When we got up several hours later and deeply hung over, we found a DVD of Rick and Tracy’s ten-week overland drive from London to Cape Town slipped it under our door with a note that read “Eat and drink well and never stop exploring.”
“My head hurts,” I said. “I think we drank a little too well last night.”
We each took two aspirin, showered, and started driving. Not rally style, as in fast and furious, but slowly and carefully. We didn’t think our heads could take it if we hit any potholes that day.
By dinnertime, camped just over the border in Botswana, the hangover was gone, but I was melancholy—mostly about leaving Africa. As if to rub it in, fork-tailed drongos, yellow-billed hornbills, guinea fowl, white-browed weavers, starlings, and long-tail shrikes all gathered around our table like forest animals would to the fictional character Snow White.
After breakfast the next morning, I washed Ndoto. I knew I would miss doing it when I left Africa. And I knew that Scott certainly wasn’t going to wash her. Every time I did, he’d shake his head and say, “I don’t understand why you do that. She’ll be dusty again in five minutes.”
We drove back to the Tuli Block in eastern Botswana, eating the rest of our perishable picnic lunch staples at a rest stop along the way. While we ate, free-range donkeys, an iconic Botswana sight, walked one behind the other on the shoulder of the road in a zombie-like state, heads hung with shoulders sagging and hooves dragging. They reminded me of what I had to look forward to—San Francisco Bay Area commuters on a Monday morning.
We set up in site number six at Limpopo River Camp, the same site we had camped in months earlier, when we first crossed the Limpopo. As before, we had the entire place to ourselves. Scott slung the hammock and settled in with Tony Park’s latest novel. I prepared a cold pasta lunch and headed for the private open-air shower. My loo with a view.
The green Limpopo River moved slowly and thickly in front of me. A small pod of hippos dozed in the water to my left and a motionless bull elephant stood across the river to my right. A kingfisher sat still on a branch overhanging the water, as if too drowsy to hunt. I glanced down at our campsite and saw that Scott had fallen asleep. Everything in eyesight was at peace. My heart tumbled and unexpected tears stung my eyes. It hit me. I thought of Eve’s wise words. I might never have this view again.
After my shower, even though we still had several weeks together, and Scott would be with Ndoto for another month after I left, I began to prepare the Landy for storage. “Why are you doing that now?” he asked from the hammock.
“I dunno. Just feel like it.”
As I went through every inch of the Landy—the library, the pantry, our clothes bins, the secret places and the super-secret places that we kept spare cash, credit cards and passports—I began collecting all the important documents, portable hard drives, laptops, wallets . . . all the valuable stuff, and I put it all in one sack and placed it inside my clothes bin. Scott, absorbed in Tony’s book, didn’t notice my somewhat irrational behavior. He wouldn’t have understood. I didn’t understand. But, like an expectant mother who compulsively nested, or like a Boy Scout who wanted to be prepared, I couldn’t stop myself.
Later, I made burritos and served them on a candlelit table with goblets of wine and a vase of wild flowers. Standing back, I took in the entire scene: the Limpopo, Ndoto, Scott, the campfire, and the burritos.
“I’m going to miss this,” I said.
“What? Cooking over a propane stove?”
“No. Well, actually yes. But what I mean is, I’m going to miss this lifestyle. This Africa. This time in our lives.”
“I’m sure going to miss your burritos when you’re gone.”
“That’s deep, Scott.”
“Well, it’s honest,” he said with a smile.
After dinner, we shined our flashlights beyond the glow of the campfire. Genets sat like cats on their haunches, patiently waiting for us to go to bed, so they could feast on the morsels that surely lay around our feet.
Not an ethical thing to do in the wild world, but Scott devised a plan for our leftover refried beans. Spreading the small white tablecloth on the sand he set about staging it with the vase of flowers, the empty bottle of wine, and a goblet. Then he placed a small portion of beans, which I shaped into a heart, on a plate. He set the camera trap to record, and we went to bed.
The next morning, we were treated to short videos of no less than six curious genets investigating the plate of beans. One young genet approached the tablecloth and scrutinized the flowers and the goblet like a food and wine critic, or inspector from the Michelin Guide, before sitting down to the beans. There was evidence of porcupine, hyena, monitor lizard, and plenty of civet tracks all around our camp. Oddly, none of these went for the beans. Only the genets came for a nibble.
“Ach! I’m going to miss this,” I said again.
“Let’s stay another night then,” Scott said with a supportive smile. “It’s beautiful here. And my phone is picking up a signal. I’m expecting an email or call about that airplane in Louis Trichardt. It would be great if we could see it on our way to Kruger.”
For the past year, Scott had been trading emails with a man and woman who flew anti-poaching patrols in Ruaha National Park in Tanzania, with the possibility of joining them at some point as a volunteer pilot. Their newest plane was presently tucked away at a hangar in a city called Louis Trichardt awaiting the pilot that would ferry the aircraft to Tanzania. Since Louis Trichardt was on the way to Kruger Park, where we planned to spend our last weeks together before I flew out, it could be a good opportunity for Scott to see the plane. Scott was warned not to count on seeing the plane because Anthony, who owned the hangar where the plane was stored, was a very busy man.
It was another perfect day in the African bush. That often happened. The closer I came to leaving Africa, the deeper the tint of my rose-colored glasses. All the days seemed perfect. Ndoto was clean, Scott and I were in sync, and somewhere out there, genets watched and waited. We went to bed nostalgic.
In the middle of the night, we heard splashing and trumpeting and looked out to see a family of elephants frolicking in the river. We hung our heads and arms out in the moonlight to soak up and enjoy one of the most beautiful bush scenes imaginable. Babies and juveniles ran back and forth in the water playing, dunking, and charging, while adults stood guard and drank before doing the same. Such joy!
“Why do the most perfect things always happen just as I am about to leave the bush?” I said.
“You should stay,” Scott said quietly, before rolling over and falling asleep. As was the case with most nights lately, sleep didn’t come easily for me. I laid awake thinking about returning home, while Scott remained in Africa. As part of “our story,” it didn’t feel right.
For forty years we had done most every adventurous thing together. We sailed our forty-foot catamaran named “Different Drummer” across the Pacific Ocean to Hawaii. We trekked in the Himalayas. We transited Africa from Casablanca to Cape Town by public transportation. We rafted the Grand Canyon and walked the Camino de Santiago. That we would now be apart, felt like a disturbance in the Force. I knew that if I had said out loud, “I want you to come home with me,” Scott would have done just that. But as much as I wanted him at my side, I also wanted him to fulfill his dreams. Still, I was losing sleep over it.
At dawn, I crept down the ladder and put the pot on for coffee. I walked slowly around camp identifying the spoor of animals that had walked through: hyena, genet, and civet.
I love mornings anywhere, but mornings in Africa are the best. Before we did anything else, we explored the “bush news” of the day. We examined the spoor that surrounded Ndoto and tried to tell the story of what visited in the night. We recovered the camera trap and thrilled in the images of elephants and hyena, porcupine and civet that walked just feet from the base of our ladder. At some camps, there were copious amounts of fresh elephant dung and spoor of all sorts around camp in the morning, which made the sometimes two-hundred-foot walk to the toilet an eyes-wide, butt-clenching, quick march experience. It was exhilarating. We were alone with nature. It’s why we come to Africa. As so often happened, when I was in Africa, gratitude and contentment washed over me. I was exactly where I wanted to be, doing exactly what I wanted to do, with the only person I could imagine doing it with.
I started a small fire to take the chill off the morning and then sat with my feet up on the concrete fire ring, content.
After half an hour, Scott joined me at the fire. He opened his iPad and saw an email from Anthony (Ant) introducing himself and saying that if Scott wanted to see the plane, he should come the following day and have a look.
“That’s wonderful,” I said taking a sip of coffee. “Timing is everything. If we couldn’t see the plane tomorrow, we wouldn’t be able to see it unless we went all the way back to Tanzania. Now you can see if it is the type of plane you feel comfortable flying before committing to volunteer when we return to Africa next year. And it’s right on our way to Kruger.”
We sat in silence enjoying the dawn chorus of sociable birds that woke up singing. Warm rays of rising sun worked like a spotlight on a solitary kingfisher that hovered and dove into the river.
“Hey. He got a fish,” I said.
“I’ve been thinking,” Scott said. “You might need help driving to Susanville to pick up Pika. It’s a long drive, and you’ll be jet lagged.” He paused and stared for a moment into the fire. “It feels like there is too much going on. I think I should come home when you do.”
I felt a great weight lift from my shoulders. “Oh, Scott. Just to hear you say that makes me happy. You must have been feeling the same as me about being apart. It just doesn’t feel right, does it?” It was my turn to stare into the fire. “But let’s talk about it after we see the plane in Louis Trichardt. I’m just happy that we are both unhappy about you staying, while I go.” I looked up as he nodded softly. I stood to give him a kiss and a hug and told him I loved him.
The following morning, when we crossed the border into South Africa and drove to Louis Trichardt, I was far from happy and content. I was anxious.
Ant wouldn’t be available to show the plane until 5:00 p.m., the exact time when day turned to night. As I said before, we tried not to drive anywhere at night in Africa. Visibility wasn’t great, so the chances of hitting a pothole, or worse, an animal or child, were concerns. Also, having a mechanical breakdown in the dark was so much more anxiety-producing than when it happened in the full light of day.
We arrived in Louis Trichardt, a small but bustling city named after a Dutch-speaking settler (Voortrekker) and drove straight to the only campground in town, which was closed.
“Let’s just lift the boom and camp here anyway,” I said. “We won’t get back from the hangar until after dark, and I don’t want to drive aimlessly around looking for another place to camp. We can stay here and leave for Kruger at first light, okay? Let’s check it out.” I started to get out of the car to lift the boom, when a camp attendant showed up.
He explained that the grounds were closed due to an international bike race happening the next day, so camping there would not be possible, which made no sense to us at all.
“There is a hotel just across the street,” he said. “Perhaps you can stay there.”
Scott walked over and inquired at the hotel. Not only were they fully booked, they assured Scott that every hotel room in town, and in towns nearby, were booked out by the more than 15,000 racers in town. We were due at the hangar in thirty minutes and my unease was mounting by the second.
Ant had told us that the hangar was difficult to find, and he wasn’t kidding. After following our GPS to a dead end at some train tracks, getting briefly bogged, and being told by a pedestrian whom we asked for directions, “Oh my, you are lost,” we finally arrived at the airfield past our appointed time and well past dark.
On the way, I said to Scott, “After you look at the plane, I am going to ask Anthony if we can pitch-up outside his hangar. The airfield security guard can let us out in the morning. We’ll be off to Kruger by the crack of dawn.”
Scott, his eyes scanning for potholes, said nothing.
When we arrived at the hangar, Ant was waiting out in front. He looked at his watch, understandably perturbed at our tardiness. But he was South African, so his manners were impeccable. He welcomed us and opened the hangar door. Off to the right sat the small anti-poaching plane, a Sky Jeep. But dominating the hangar was a Polish Wilga, which is the most romantic-looking bush plane ever made. It’s the Ndoto of bush planes.
“Wow! That’s a Wilga,” Scott with excitement. “Where did you get it? How long have you had her?” Eyes wide, Scott circled the plane. He impulsively reached out to stroke the fuselage.
As with anyone who is met with an appreciative audience, Ant happily talked about his Wilga and how a lady pilot had flown it there from Poland, how much he loved to fly in her, and how much his wife didn’t.
Scott and Ant eventually made their way over to the Sky Jeep, which looked in fine shape and ready to help save some rhinos and elephants in Tanzania. They seemed to lose track of time, but I didn’t. It was pitch black outside.
“Ant, it’s so kind of you to take the time to show Scott and me the plane, but I have one more favor to ask. All the accommodations in town are completely booked, and the campsite is closed because of the bike race. May we pitch-up outside your hangar for the night? We would leave for Kruger at first light.”
“No. You are staying at my house,” he said without hesitation.
I was floored. “But why?” I asked. “You just met us.”
“That doesn’t matter. Now get in your Landy and follow me.”
We did as we were told and followed Ant through the township surrounding the airfield and up into the suburbs in the hills above the city. It was the first of many times over the next sixteen hours that I would ask, “why?”
A HORRIBLE DAY AND ACTS OF LOVING KINDNESS
Seven enthusiastic dogs of varying sizes and three cats, along with Ant’s wife, Norma, greeted us in the small foyer. He must have phoned her on the way.
“Welcome, welcome. Now,” she said gesturing to a room to her left, “this will be your accommodation for the night. You must be desperate for showers. Take your time, and then meet us in the lounge for drinks. And of course, you will join us for dinner.”
“But why?” I asked peering into a beautifully-appointed bedroom, with en suite bathroom off the entryway. “You don’t even know us,” I repeated.
“Nonsense. Freshen up and we’ll see you for drinks soon, all right?” she said.
“All right.” After bushcamping for three nights, no one needed showers more than us.
Soon, we were gathered in the lounge with Norma, Ant, their son and his new bride, and a pregnant (nine months along) veterinarian, staying in a guesthouse on the property. All the dogs and one cat crowded on sofas and laps around us. I loved everything about this house and these people. It had an air of You Can’t Take It with You, the 1938 movie with Lionel Barrymore and Jimmy Stewart. It was a house filled with love, acceptance, and stick-togetherness.
Over drinks, we acknowledged we had friends and acquaintances in common. We were enthralled by Ant and Norma’s stories of Zimbabwe and of how they’d met. It was as if we had known each other for decades, rather than a few minutes.
None of the talk was small. They told us about their children and about how they had never had a honeymoon. We talked about our families, about how lucky we were to have so many wonderful nieces and nephews since we were unlucky to have kids of our own. I told them about Clare and Colin, the youngest of the batch from my siblings and how we were the ones who got to teach them to ski, to backpack, and how to poo in the woods. I talked about how homesick I was and how anxious I was to see them.
I smiled a lot as I spoke, remembering how much fun we had with Clare and Colin growing up and about what wonderful people they had become—Clare a comedian and writer in New York and Colin, in love with his girlfriend, Selina, and studying to be a firefighter. The times spent with Clare and Colin were some of the happiest of my life. Clare and I were especially close. When there was the bad news at the end of her mom’s illness, that there was to be no more treatment, she’d heard it from me. Since her mother’s passing, she was like a daughter to me. When we spoke, we gave it to each other straight.
“Scott and I travel a lot,” I said to Norma. “We’ve been away from home longer than this before, but this time it feels I’ve been away forever. Being here with your family, all the laughter, the warm fire, reminds me of what I am missing. I’m really looking forward to being home.”
While we talked, Ant’s son Benjie worked the grill, and before long we were gathered around a table in the kitchen enjoying meat, salads, and wine aplenty.
It was getting late. Ant had an early morning meeting, and we wanted to be off to Kruger Park at sun up.
“Of course, you will have breakfast with us before you leave,” Norma said.
“But why? Really you mustn’t go to the trouble.”
“Nonsense. Ant must eat early too, so it is no trouble at all,” Norma said.
I was falling in love with this family.
Scott and I retired to our quarters for the night feeling cared for and loved.
“Why?” I asked as we climbed into bed. “Why are they so kind? We are total strangers, or were. I can’t believe the stuff we talked about. Personal stuff you usually save for the fifth date, you know?”
“They are just good people, Tris. We would have done the same if we encountered a stinky couple without accommodation for the night.” He leaned over and kissed me. “Sleep tight.”
But I didn’t sleep tight. I tossed and turned. Even though we were safe and sound for the night, the anxiety I had felt since yesterday had not left me. I was up and ready to go by 6 a.m.
We ate with Ant and Norma, promised to stay in touch, and drove off down the hill. As we rounded the first bend, I took out my phone to check for messages. What I saw made my heart stop. There were messages from my niece Clare and from my brother Sean. The messages just said URGENT. “Pull over Scott,” I said.
Scott pulled off the road and grabbed his iPad. “I’ll connect with Skype, so you can talk to Sean and Clare.”
I tried calling Sean, but my call went to voicemail. I called Clare and that call went to voicemail as well. My brother Joe had been unwell since Clare’s mom died, so thinking the worst, I began doing an online search for the closest airport. We had never been to Louis Trichardt before, so for all we knew we would need to drive all the way to Johannesburg to catch a flight.
Then my phone rang.
“Auntie, Teresa,” Clare said, “Auntie, Teresa.”
“Clare? What’s wrong? What happened?” I said with my heart in my throat.
“Auntie, Teresa, Colin died.”
“WHAT?”
Colin, 25, was my brother Sean’s only child.
I screamed. I wailed. “It can’t be. Sean and Ann. Selina. Oh my God. How will they survive?”
Our anguished sobs carried across oceans and continents.
I kept repeating, “No, no, no, no…”
Clare said over and over “I know. I know.” I could hear the pain in her voice. She and Colin were only children and a year apart in age, Clare and Colin grew up like siblings.
Scott told me later that he had never seen anyone tremble as I was trembling.
“How?” I said while sobbing.
“No one knows yet. But Uncle Sean was the one who found him.”
“Oh my God.” I sobbed for I don’t know how long, then said, “Clare, I’m coming home. I’m coming now, Clare.”
I reached for Scott and then looked past him to see Norma had pulled alongside in her car, her brow furrowed and her lips tight.
“I heard such screaming, so I came to see who it was. But, it’s you. What has happened?”
I was still shaking. Scott was speechless and as white as a sheet.
Finally, I managed to expel answers. “It’s my nephew. The one I told you about. Colin.”
Her face softened. For the third time since I’d met her just twelve hours earlier, Norma took charge and told us what to do. “Go back to the house. Park your Landy in the driveway. I will see to it that you get to an airport. You mustn’t worry about anything.” She said those words three times.
Back at Ant and Norma’s house, Scott climbed up on the roof of Ndoto and retrieved our backpacks out of the small storage bin. He tossed them down, and I began throwing things inside. We didn’t speak. We just did. And I didn’t have to think. All I had to do was pick up the sack I had filled the day before, with all our important stuff, and put it in the backpack. It was weird. This was why I organized everything yesterday, I thought to myself.
Norma stood by saying, “Don’t worry about forgetting something. You don’t need it.” And, “Now, you mustn’t worry about your Landy. Just park it over there and don’t think about it. Go in the house. Scott, you can use my computer to book a flight. You must both drink the tea I give you. There is not a bit of color in either of your faces.”
We followed her inside, our shoulders slumped, and our eyes glazed over. I reached the bathroom just in time, as my guts and bowels gave way.
Norma gave us hot, sweet tea and pink grapefruit juice, also thick with sugar. I later learned these were good for shock. She stood by and let me talk about Colin, what an amazing young man he had become, what a wonderful girlfriend he had, and what a wonderful father he would have been.
“Why?” I said sobbing. “And my God, why are you doing all this for us?”
“This is what we do. You would do the same for me.”
Within fifteen minutes of hearing the news, we were on our way to an airport located one hundred kilometers away in Polokwane. There, we boarded a ten-seater plane bound for Johannesburg. All I remember of the flight was Scott repeatedly leaning across the aisle and squeezing my leg.
In the car on the way to the Polokwane airport, Scott booked the last two seats on a flight from Johannesburg to Abu Dhabi. Everything was out of focus and seemed unreal.
On the departure board in the Johannesburg airport, I noticed that there was a flight leaving for Dubai in ten minutes. From Dubai we could catch a flight to San Francisco. I begged the gate staff to hold the plane for us, but they said it was impossible. So we had to wait hours to depart on the flight to Abu Dhabi.
Scott had reserved the last seats, but they weren’t together. At the gate, Scott explained to the ground staff that we were returning home due to a tragic loss of a family member. They found a way to have us sit together. Thank God. I don’t remember a thing from that ten-hour flight.
We landed in Abu Dhabi and had to wait for a connection to San Francisco. The seventeen-hour flight to San Francisco was a blur. I was in a total fog. Then, it was an hour by car from SFO to San Jose.
The forty hours from the time I’d received the news, until I was in my brother’s arms, was a kind of agony I never want to relive. I only remember two things from it: my body turning inside out and Scott’s hand squeezing my leg.
I knew then the answer to the question I kept repeating to Ant and Norma: Why?
If it hadn’t been for our chance meeting and how they had insisted we stay with them and enfolded us into their family, I don’t know what we would have done. Norma knew just what to do to keep us from driving away distraught and without a plan. She took charge because she knew we couldn’t think clearly. She ordered us back to the house and treated us for shock. She offered phone and computer, so Scott could try to book flights. She repeated everything three times because she knew we couldn’t comprehend words.
I no longer believe in coincidences. I believe in synchronicity and love. Something told me to prepare for a disaster the day before. Then, there was the bike race and the lack of hotel rooms, the Sky Jeep in Ant’s hangar, and Ant’s love of Landys—and Ant’s insistence that we stay at his house. Norma’s warmth, the dogs, the cats, the love, all of it was set in place for us, so that we could survive to help others survive.
We stayed in our niece’s cottage until our tenants moved out. She again fed us fresh baked bread, calm love, and compassion. My best friend drove seven hours to deliver our cat, Pika, to us, “Because,” she said, “you will need her.”
HOME
And we did.
Our tenants moved out a week after we’d arrived. That was a good thing since the memorial for my nephew Colin was held three days after that at our home.
I don’t know how we’d managed it. Yes, I do. People like Ant and Norma stepped up without question. They arranged the best caterer in Silicon Valley on short notice. A family friend flew across the country and arranged all the flowers. The day of the event, neighbors appeared in the morning. They set up all the chairs and tables, donated wine, and enveloped us in regular doses of hugs. There were over four hundred people in attendance. Speeches were heartfelt, unforgettable. Those attending, even those who had never met Colin, said that the day transformed them. Upon hearing that he had died instantly, of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (an enlarged heart), many people uttered quietly, “Of course he did,” because no one had a bigger heart than Colin.
Just two weeks before he had passed, Colin had completed his training, along with extensive physical tests and interviews, to become a firefighter, his dream career. He was still awaiting the news if he would be offered a position when he passed away. We found out the night before the memorial that he had achieved his goal. A fire Captain came to the memorial, read the acceptance letter, and presented Colin’s helmet, jacket, and badge to his parents. It was the proudest and saddest I had ever seen my brother. Throughout the service, Scott squeezed my leg.
HOME
Our homecoming was, of course, emotional and overwhelming. Absent were the usual welcome home dinners, the “which place was your favorite?” questions. We weren’t in Africa, but we didn’t feel like we were home yet, either. For the first three weeks, I couldn’t feel the air around me.
When the time was right (how do people know these things?), ever thoughtful neighbors presented us with an African-themed quilt and gave us a book of African poetry. Another neighbor collected signatures from all our neighbors on a gigantic poster with a collage of photos and quotes from our trip, proof that it really did happen.
Even in our misery, we were reminded of all we had been grateful for before we went to Africa. It was family, neighbors, friends, and our home that hugged me every time I walked through the front door, and kindness and caring to infinity and beyond.
In my front yard, I added a tribute to compassion, loving-kindness, and serendipity. In honor of Colin, Yusuf, and Ant and Norma, I planted a pomegranate tree, the symbol of life and rebirth.
After losing Colin, everything was different. Colors were not as bright. Everything seemed duller yet more authentic. More African. My rose-colored glasses seemed off for good.
I thought about my brother Sean and his wife, Ann. When someone you love loses their only child, there are no words. One thing was certain. Nothing could ever hurt them again.
Our entire family is forever changed. Our relationships are different. In life, we try to make sense of things, but this kind of tragedy never makes sense. When heartbreak such as this happens, you begin questioning everything.
My brother Sean and I have always been extremely close. We went to the beach together, boogie boarded together, and had long talks. We’d always shared everything. We seemed to always be on the same page. Together, we had weathered all our family tragedies—first Dad and then Mom. After Mom had died, we said, “no more.” But six months later, our oldest brother Mike died. Then, my brother Joe’s wife, Cynthia (Clare’s mom and a hub in our family) passed away. Through it all, Sean and I took the losses head-on, side by side, helping to care for our family members and each other. It was what had gotten us through the pain.
But with Colin’s sudden and infinitely unfair passing, Sean, always my anchor, couldn’t be beside me because he was in the pain. We both floundered without a safety line to grab hold of. We both had many days where we felt alone.
There is no right or wrong way to grieve. I realized later that during that first horrible month after Colin had passed that Scott and I watched a lot of John Wayne movies. We didn’t plan to watch John Wayne movies. But every day we would come home after spending time with Sean and Ann, feeling worthless because there wasn’t a way to take away their kind of pain. I realized nothing ever could. We’d turn on the TV, and a John Wayne movie would be on. We’d sit on the couch shoulder to shoulder feeling the saddest and the most ineffective of our lives and watch the Duke rescue people. Weird, but not weird. I read somewhere that when Katharine Hepburn was in a film with John Wayne, she would lean against his body as often as possible, even when the script did not call for it. “It was like leaning against a strong tree,” she said.
Maybe Scott and I were looking for some recipe for how to endure, so we could be helpful to Sean and Ann who desperately needed strong, baobab tree sized bodies to lean against after the loss of their only child.
I didn’t know exactly when, or how, but like most in the world who have suffered tragic loss, we all went on living, even more grateful for the people we love and the beauty that surrounds us in this short story called life.
EPILOGUE
Right up until that dreadful day when we learned of Colin’s passing, our time in Africa was a Safari Ndefu Jema, a good long journey.
Except for visiting South Sudan, we accomplished what we set out to do. While we sometimes pushed Ndoto and ourselves to our limits, we never wanted to throw in the towel. With each challenge, our dream of seeing Africa on our own terms only became stronger.
We broke a lot of leaf springs and replaced many bushings, but that was the price of taking the road less traveled in one of the most classic overland vehicles imaginable. We wouldn’t trade that for anything. In the end, Scott considered all the repairs “normal maintenance” for any vehicle enduring months on end of hard driving in Africa. There were no fatal breakdowns, and we met a lot of interesting mechanics.
Ndoto was the keystone of our adventure. No vehicle since Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, or Thomas the Tank Engine, has had more personality or attracted more attention. But Ndoto wasn’t a fictional vehicle. She was real. Her dents, rust, and unpredictable noises brought smiles to women, children, and gruff police officers all over East and Southern Africa.
Ndoto is like Africa. She is old, depleted, and pushed to the brink of exhaustion. But at the same time, she is beautiful, strong, and resilient. She opened doors we never knew existed and because of her, we experienced more of the real Africa, the Africa most visitors couldn’t even dream of experiencing.
We’d covered over forty-eight thousand kilometers in Ndoto. We’d come far enough to make it hard to overlook what seemed unfixable in some of the countries we visited. Corruption, drought, rampant poaching, and the fact that people were being driven from their homeland, just because they were different, made it sometimes difficult to feel the heartbeat of Africa, the joy that runs like a thread through the length and breadth of the continent.
Sometimes I worried that I had seen too much. The rose-tinted glasses through which I saw Africa on previous journeys, had become scuffed by time and observation. But in my heart, I know that, as with Scott, Africa is a long-term relationship. I know I will continue to love her through good times and bad.
There is one thing that was more powerful than all the rest: the African Dream. Mathews, the security guard who was on Colin Patrick’s tracking course with us, retook and passed his assessment and now works as a tracker, his dream job. Yes, anything’s possible. As long as there are children in rural villages who consider it a privilege to attend school and who say in an all-things-are possible voice, “When I grow up, I want to be a doctor (or tracker),” I will return again and again.
Scott eventually took up flying again, mostly in a taildragger bush plane and earned his private pilot license in California. It is a wonderful thing to watch the person you love most fulfill a dream they’ve had since they were sixteen. Still, Pika and I were always glad to see him home after an afternoon of flying.
A few months after the memorial, Scott returned to Africa, to Ant and Norma’s home. He drove Ndoto, alone, all the way back to Hoedspruit and put her in storage where she awaits our return.
Little by little, Africa is becoming a warm memory rather than a requirement to breathe. But, oh, how I do remember.
I miss our Ndoto. I think we’ll always have our Land Rover. I tried to convince Scott that we should ship her to Brazil and drive her back to California. Then I would put her out to pasture and dote upon her. But maybe Ndoto belongs where she is strongest, in Africa.
One thing Sean and I talked about often after Colin’s passing, was that loss was something we have to live with and that it would never end. It was all too true. Eighteen months after Colin had died, and eight years after losing his wife to cancer, our brother Joe (Clare’s dad), who was a former film commissioner and one of the funniest humans I’ve ever known, passed away in his sleep after suffering a heart attack. All the movie references in my book are my homage to him.
More than ever, Scott and I understand that opportunities should not be wasted, dreams should not be put off or postponed, and love is the thing that ensures survival and carries us through life.
*** END OF THIS TEXT My Life with Ndoto: Exploring Africa in a Forty-Year-Old Land Rover ***